USE OF STUDENT HANDBOOK 1. Student Handbook is designed to help you organize your study time and use this to your full advantage. 2. Read the provisions of this handbook for your strict observance. 3. Always bring this handbook within the school premises and present it to the school authorities when requested. 4. Periodically, you must show this handbook to your parents/guardians for signature and for any queries or comments. 5. In case of loss or damage of this handbook, you are required to immediately report to the Prefect of Discipline for appropriate action. 6. Students ARE NOT ALLOWED to write in another's handbook. IGNACIAN MARIAN COMMITMENT We, the Ignacian Marians, at all times, in the spirit of our motto: TO JESUS AND MARY Commit ourselves to: 1. love GOD and our country and be loyal to our school and class; 2. follow the rules of good manners and the norms of Christian morality in our personal and social behavior in respect for and love of GOD and our fellowmen and women; 3. show respect to all who exercise authority: school administrators, personnel, teachers, parents, and student leaders; 4. give first attention to our studies, and in the spirit of service, participate in co-curricular, extra-curricular, and community service activities; and 5. be smart and simple in ways of dressing, talking, and appearance and follow the school's rules and regulations stated in this handbook. SMCB GENERAL INFORMATION 1. A GLIMPSE INTO THE LIFE OF VENERABLE IGNACIA DEL ESPIRITU SANTO Biography of Mother Ignacia del Espiritu Santo 1663-1748 Ignacia was baptized IGNACIA DEL ESPIRITU SANTO, a name chosen for her by her parents. Her father. Jusefe luco was a Chinese from Amoy, China while her mother, Maria Geronima from Binondo, Manila was a Filipina or Yndia as the Filipina was called then. As the eldest, she had one brother and two sisters who all died in infancy. Ignacia was baptized on March 4, 1663 at Holy Kings Parian but she grew up at Binondo, Manila the place for converted Chinese. At the age of 21, her parents wanted her to get married. In her desire to seek and to do God's will, she made a retreat- the "spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola" upon the advice of a Jesuit, Fr. Pablo Clain There in the retreat she decided to give her whole life to God having been enlightened that married life was not for her. After the retreat, she left her parents who could decently support her, and brought only a needle and a pair of scissors from home. She lived a life of solitude living by the sweat of her brow. Her life of prayer, sacrifice and charitable works to others attracted many ladies who joined her that brought about the birth of a group of women under her leadership called Beaterio dela Compañia de Jesus in Intramuros. This group received this name because they frequented the Church of St. Ignatius of the Jesuits or the Compañia de Jesus as they were known. Mother Ignacia's life of prayer and penance included carrying the cross under the noonday sun. She exhorted her companions to prayer for God's mercy and trust always in the Divine Providence In 1737, Mother Ignacia relinquished her position as head to Mother Dominga del Rosario with the 1726 Rule as guide. This Rule stressed that everyone in the house belonged to the family of Mary in serving God our Lord and in knowing Jesus Christ as necessary for life here on earth and eternal happiness in the next. Everyone was exhorted to live in God's presence always, find Him in all things and to live in one community permeated by the spirit of peace, reconciliation and love. On September 10, 1748, Mother Ignacia died at the age of 85 years old and was buried at the Church of St. Ignatius. Her funeral was honored by the presence of ecclesiastics and Spaniards who bore her coffin. Murillo Velarde, a Jesuit historian and contemporary of Mother Ignacia has this to say of her. "Mother Ignacia, foundress of this institution died on September 10, 1748. She was genuinely a valiant woman, overcoming not only the great difficulties met from the very foundation of the institution up to its completion, but more especially for having conquered with singular persistence the three species of indolence most arduous and difficult to overcome: those innate in the country, those natural to her sex, and those congenital in the very entrails of the nation. She was mortified, patient, devout, spiritual, zealous for the good of souls, very humble, this last proved by her having abdicated spontaneously the government allowing herself to be overcome by the of the house, without desire to command, which can be likened to a wood-borer that destroy such hardwoods as the cedar or hyssop”. At the time of her death, she had 50 companions who aspired towards the same ideals and goals for which Ignacia herself left home and parents in order to live a life of prayer, sacrifice and service. At a time when the nature of religious life was in many ways monastic, and therefore protected within convent walls by cloister and grills, the little group of Mother Ignacia added to such convent practices, a life of action and service. In particular, they involved themselves in the retreat movement for women and in the education of the less fortunate of society. The same works continue even today among the more than 70 RVM communities and the more than 600 RVM Sisters all over the Philippines and abroad. The group that Mother Ignacia started received Civil Protection from the King of Spain on November 25, 1755 after having passed the scrutiny of the Royal Audencia that unanimously rated its service as laudable in the City of Manila. "Mother Ignacia del Espiritu Santo is the genuine product of the nation in the highest order and a fitting model of womanhood" runs an article in the September 7, 1893 issue of the Weekly paper, La Ilustracion Filipina. "She was the foundress of a religious institution that still lives its pristine spirit vigorously two centuries after its foundation" The congregation she started was described during her time as the "blossoming of virtues and virginity in a thorn-choked desert", Twentieth century Philippines called the Religious of the Virgin Mary, the present name of the Beaterio as citadel of religion and culture and the the re- incarnation of authentic Marian devotion in the Philippines. Down the centuries, Mother Ignacia del Espiritu Santo was described as a discerning woman of courage, with a strong faith in God that propelled her to make bold initiatives in spite of obstacles to be of service to all people, especially the poor, her very own people and discriminated against, as her contribution to her country and the Church of her times. 2. HISTORY OF ST. MARY’S COLLEGE OF BALIUAG, INC (Revised 2023) ST. MARY'S COLLEGE OF BALIUAG (SMCB), founded in 1912, is the oldest existing Catholic School in the town of Baliuag, Bulacan. It is owned and administered by the Religious of the Virgin Mary, better known as the RVM Sisters. This sectarian school began as COLEGIO DE LA SAGRADA FAMILIA or HOLY FAMILY SCHOOL. It was put up by Fr. Benito Sebrero for the Sisters to provide education and religious instruction to young girls and at the same time, to serve as the Catholic school of the parish. Originally located a few blocks from the Catholic church, it acquired its present site through the generosity of Fr. Victor Enrile, then Parish Priest. Its pioneering years in Baliuag were "years of financial crisis, trials and deprivation." It was only Fr. Enrile's fatherly solicitude and Doña Dorotea Francisco's magnanimity encouraged the Sisters to go on. On September 15, 1916 the Archdiocese of Manila, through Rev. Jeremias J. Harty, granted the Religious of the Virgin Mary (then headed by Superior General Mother Ma. Efigenia Alvarez), perpetual and gratuitous use of that parcel of land along what is now known as Racelis Street. In the beginning, the school offered only a primary course, piano lessons, and catechetical classes. Intermediate classes were opened in 1933. When World War Il broke out, classes were suspended and with the townspeople. Japanese soldiers occupied the school house until the eve of liberation. In 1945, the sisters hurried back to town and reopened the school. This time, complete elementary and secondary courses were offered. Boys and girls were admitted in the grade school and only girls in the high school. The elementary course was granted government recognition in 1946 and the secondary course in 1949. The high school tried admitting boys in 1954 but this co-educational experiment lasted only until 1958 because there were other non-sectarian schools in the vicinity that provided secondary education for boys. To accommodate the rapidly growing population, S. Ma. Filomena Ariona started the construction of a new building which was finished through the initiative of S. Ma. Geronima Perez. This was blessed on June 30, 1959 by Fr. Amado Paulino, then the Assistant Parish Priest. In the same year, the Holy Family School was renamed ST. MARY'S ACADEMY (SMA). From 1961 to 1967, SMA achieved an appreciable degree of progress and expansion through the leadership of S. Ma. Fideliz Dar Santos who spearheaded the construction of the annex building. This housed the Sisters' cloister, chapel, interns' dormitory, library, and science laboratory. The extension of this building was completed by the succeeding Superior-principal, S. Ma. Felisa Declaro. The building housed the principal’s and cashier’s offices and high school classrooms. These improvements spurred an influx of more students. For more effective teacher supervision, academic coordinators were assigned beginning in mid-1970: Ms. Herminia Demetrio for the grade school department and Ms. Ofelia delos Santos for the high school department. During the administration of S. Ma. Celedonia Amper, a four storey building was constructed along Racelis Street in 1986. This was named St Joseph Building. In school year 1985-1986, at the request of the parents. SMA readmitted boys in the high school department. In 1990, another structure named Mother Ignacia Building was constructed to complete the school front of four-storey buildings, now a landmark in the town of Baliuag. In 1994, with S. Ma Luz dela Cruz at the helm, a bilateral building to replace the old grade school building was constructed. Named Assumption Building, it had 28 classrooms, a chapel, a library, an audio-visual room, the guidance and administrative offices. In response to the thrust for lay empowerment, the first Lay High School Principal, Mrs, Myrna Bondad, was appointed in June 1995. S. Ma. Lilibeth Monteclaro was also assigned as Grade School Principal. S. Ma. Violeta Acosta took over as Directress in school year 1996-1997. She took the initial steps on having the school accredited by the Philippines Accrediting Association of Schools, Colleges, and Universities (PAASCU). Both the grade school and high school departments passed the preliminary visits with flying colors in 1999 and 2000, respectively. In June 1999, Mrs. Elizabeth Chico was appointed the first lay Grade School Principal. Through her leadership, the elementary department passed the first formal visit in September 2000. Starting school year 2000-2001, Sma shifted and explored other innovative teaching-learning techniques and introduced the use of strategies that cater to the students’ divergent learning capacities and modalities. The school can claim to be the first in Baliuag to advocate the use of classroom activities based on Howard Gardner's theory of Multiple Intelligences and Dunn and Dunn Learning Style Model. Beginning school year 2001-2002, S. Ma. Marissa Viri took over as SMA's directress. In October of the same year, the high school department was granted accredited status by PAASCU. In March 2002, the school applied for tertiary level programs and was renamed St. Mary's College of Baliuag (SMCB) with S. Ma. Marissa Viri as its first President. The first batch of college students was admitted in the academic year 2002-2003. The following courses were offered: Bachelor of Science in Information Technology (BSIT), Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA), Bachelor of Secondary Education (BSEd), and Bachelor of Elementary Education (BEEd). On February 28, 2003, a new edifice Sacred Heart Building that would connect St Joseph and Assumption Buildings was inaugurated. This would house the college library, two computer laboratories, speech laboratory, audio-visual room, computer aided instruction (CAI) room, and the college offices. In June 2003, the bridge that now connects the Mother Ignacia and St. Joseph Buildings was completed. The space generated by the bridge provided rooms for the new offices of the high school principal on the third floor and the high school guidance staff on the fourth floor. In the school year 2003-2004, the college department added two more courses: Bachelor of Science in Nursing (BSN) and Bachelor of Science in Hotel and Restaurant Management (BSHRM). This same year, the CISCO Program was offered to both BSIT and 3rd to 4th year high school students. The grade school department also started offering nursery classes for three-year old kids. In September 2003, the grade school department had its first PAASCU re-visit and was granted Five-Year Accredited Status. The following school year, 2004-2005 the high school department was revisited and was also granted a Five-Year Accredited Status. The following lay administrators were appointed in school year 2005-2006: Mrs. Myrna Bondad as the Director for Academics and Research (DAR) and Dean of College; Mrs. Elizabeth Chico as the Director for Administrative and Support Services (DASS); Mr. Rogelio dela Peñia Jr. as the High School Principal and Mr. Perfecto Austria as the Grade School Principal, The first capping and candle-lighting ceremony of the Nursing Program was held on June 7, 2005 and the first college graduation was held on March 19, 2006. To accommodate the increasing enrollment, an additional five-storey building, the Immaculate Heart Building (IHB), was constructed in November 2005 along Año Street. This was finished and blessed in December 2006. This new building houses the canteen and bookstore on the ground floor while on the second floor up to the fourth floor are for the high school offices, library, classrooms, and two science laboratories. On the fifth floor are the school's auditorium and audio-visual room and a portion of the western end of the roofing was made into a view deck and an elevator was installed. In 2007, the college started offering short-term technical vocational courses. BSHRM students were also sent to on-the-job training to Singapore. In 2009, the HRM laboratory underwent a major renovation. In June 2008, S. Ma. Marisa Rebosura was appointed as the second President of SMCB. In September 2008, SMCB partnered with Gawad Kalinga (GK) and became the GK Builder's Institute in Bulacan. On February 24-25, 2009, the grade school department underwent its PAASCU revisit and was granted Level II Re-Accredited Status. With Mrs. Ma. Clara Sepacio as the new Principal, the high school department underwent its revisit on August 26-27, 2010 and was also granted Level II Re-Accredited Status. With the theme, “Rekindling the Spirit,” SMCB celebrated its 100 years in 2012. The celebration highlighted the school's looking back with pride and deep gratitude to the Foundress of the RVM Congregation, Venerable Ignacia Del Espiritu Santo. She started to kindle the fire of FAITH. EXCELLENCE, and SERVICE among the first group of beatas, who in turn, had perpetrated and caused the blaze to spread until our present time. By rekindling the spirit of FAITH, SMCB has nurtured among its students a solid belief in Almighty God. By rekindling the spirit of EXCELLENCE, SMCB has developed the passion of students to always strive for the best. By rekindling the spirit of SERVICE, SMCB has sown the burning desire for the students to be of help to others, especially the poor. On December 12, 2012, Feast of Our Lady of Guadalupe, the school celebrated its Centennial Jubilee. On the same day, SMCB was consecrated to our Lady. Physical improvement done during the centennial year included the putting up of the school museum and Mother Ignacia cornerstone, renovation of the school facade, expansion of the school chapel. transfer of the Guidance and Testing Center, Registrar and Cashier's offices to the ground floor of Mother Ignacia Building. The high school TLE Laboratory was also refurbished. St. Mary's College of Baliuag trusting in God's providence, has continued to ignite the three Ignacian core values of faith, excellence and service as it journeys beyond its first 100 years. For 2012-2013, the school underwent another major change. With the implementation of an institutionalized management and supervision system, an Integrated Basic Education (IBEd) department was born where there is only one principal, academic coordinators and subject area coordinators for both grade school and high school. For the merged set-up, Mrs. Myrna Bondad was appointed as the first IBEd Principal and Mrs. Ma. Clara Sepacio and Mrs. Gloryfiel Entendez as the HS and GS Academic Coordinators, respectively. Mrs. Marita Fiestada was appointed Dean of College and Head of Administrative and Support Services. The same school year also signaled the implementation of the K to 12 Curriculum in Grades 1 and 7. In June 2013, air conditioning units were installed in all classrooms and learning centers. With the school's adoption of the GENYO E-Learning Management System to replace the CISCO Program, a new computer laboratory was added for the purpose. A new program, Bachelor of Science in Tourism Management (BSTM). was offered in the college department. School year 2014-2015 was marked by the following milestones: 1) The PAASCU Resurvey of the IBEd department on October 23-24, 2014 and the eventual granting of another five-year Re-Accredited Status until2019; 2) The granting of ISO 9001:2008 Certificate by TUV Rheinland from May 2015 until May 2018; 3) The Department of Education's (DepEd) granting of the provisionary permit for SMCB's Senior High School Program (SHSP) which was offered beginning SY 2016-2017. Physical improvement included the merging of the Basic Education and College libraries; a satellite canteen and a multi- purpose hall at the Sacred Heart Building: a wellness center and Kid's Care room on the ground floor of Holy Family Building. CCTV cameras were also installed in strategic places for security and monitoring purposes. In school year 2015-2016, SMCB welcomed S. Ma. Paula G. Adaoag as its third President. The following were the appointments / reappointments of that year: Mrs. Myrna Bondad as the Head for Administrative and Support Services (HASS) and Quality Management Representative (QMR); Mrs. Ma. Clara Sepacio as the IBEd Principal; Mrs. Mercedita Dungo, as the IBEd Academic Coordinator, and Mrs. Marita Festada as the College Dean. In preparation for Senior High School, Mr. Perfecto Austria was also assigned as Senior High School (SHS) Ad Hoc Coordinator. Fiberglass railings along the corridors of all four major buildings were installed for safety purposes; the two science laboratories and stockroom located at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Building (IHMB) were renovated to conform to safety requirements. The College Department opened the Teacher Certification Program (TCP) and the BSTM was given government recognition by the Commission on Higher Education (CHED). On November 7, 2016, SMCB was formally awarded its ISO 9001:2008 Certificate by TUV Rheinland. For school year 2016-2017, SMCB welcomed its first batch of Senior High School (SHS) students in the Academic Track with the following strands: Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM), Accounting, Business and Management (ABM), Humanities and Social Sciences (HUMSS), and General Academic (GA). Technical-Vocational Track includes specialization in Home Economics [HE] and Information and Communication Technology (ICT). For the school’s facilities, a library for senior high school was provided and a new state of the art speech laboratory was installed. On the other hand, one class of the Munting Paaralan ni Madre Ignacia Del Espiritu Santo (MPMIDES), an outreach program of the school’s Community Involvement Program (CIP) was transferred to the SMCB campus in June. This program provides free education to deserving Kindergarten pupils. For quality assurance, the Federation of Accrediting Agencies of the Philippines (FAAP) granted the school’s Basic Education Program Level III Re-Accredited Status after having satisfactorily met the standards and fulfilled the requirements of the PAASCU. The certification was given on July 18, 2016, and is valid until November 2019. Due to the untimely death of S. Ma. Paula Adaoag on September 30, 2016, S. Ma. Celerina Bodiongan was designated as the new school President and Mrs. Myrna Bondad was also appointed as the Executive Vice President. On March 1, 2017, TUV Rheinland had its second Follow-Up Audit where the audit team concluded that the SMCB “has established and maintained an effective system to ensure compliance with its policies and objectives” and therefore recommended the maintenance of the existing ISO Certification. SY 2017-2018 signals the school’s transitioning to ISO 9001:2015 Standards. For SY 2017-2018, SMCB was clustered with two other sister schools (SMA Hagonoy and SMA Guagua) under the leadership of one President, S. Ma. Celerina Bodiongan. This school year, a new batch of grade 11 students was welcomed as SMCB prepared for the first Grade 12 graduation in March 2018. Mr. Perfecto Austria was appointed as SHS Academic Coordinator with MTS. Annabel Gonzales as the first SHS Prefect of Discipline. SMCB had its re-certification audit for upgrading to ISO 9001:2015 on March 1, 2018. Four auditors from TUV Rheinland confirmed, in line with the audit targets, that “the organization’s management system complies with, adequately maintains and implements the requirements of the standard(s).” The team recommended the issuance of the ISO 9001:2015 certificate. In SY 2019-2020, the three RVM schools were declustered and the IBEd Department had its PAASCU Resurvey visit on October 24-25, February 18, 2020. The school underwent and passed its second follow up audit by TUV Rheinland Ph. Improvements in the physical plant included the MIC’s learning commons with Marian Café, provision of a robust laboratory, ACER Academy for SHS and Business Laboratory for the College. This was also the year when the school adopted a strong health insurance policy for students and personnel. As the global COVID-19 pandemic, With the extended enhanced community quarantine, the administration decided to hold the school’s first online Graduation, Completion and Recognition Day ceremonies on May 8. A Resiliency and Sustainability Plan was prepared and implemented to guide the school in meeting the challenges brought about by the new normal in SY 2020-2021. With face-to-face classes prohibited, digital delivery of instruction and other flexible learning modalities have been utilized. Moreover, the Parents’ Portal was set up for parents and the school to exchange messages, send and receive important academic-related information and documents about students without having to do face-to-face meetings. The portal also served as a medium for the school to broadcast announcements and reminders. During this time of the pandemic, the safety of everyone, especially the parents and students, was the school’s main concern. Therefore, online enrollment alongside online payment was adopted to provide a better and more accessible enrollment and payment system. August 24, 2020 marked the beginning of classes. This academic year, S. Ma. Anita Tomas, RVM was appointed as Dean of College. In SY 2021-2022, the institution has established a shared leadership with newly appointed academic leaders in the persons of Mr. Perfecto Austria, Mrs. Jennifer Santos and Mrs. Cecilia Alcantara as the IBED Principal, IBED Academic Coordinator and Head of Administrative and Support Services (HASS) and Quality Management Representative respectively. Also, SY 2021-2022 marked SMCB’s second year of battling Online Distance Learning (ODL.) Despite the current roadblocks brought about by the pandemic, St. Mary’s College of Baliwag, Inc. on its 109th year of existence and trusting in God’s assistance, looked forward with hope to brighter years of delivering Quality Transformative Ignacian Marian Education through Quality Technology Infused Modes of Education (Q TIME) towards the formation of Christ-centered leaders empowered to serve their fellowmen and women and contribute to the betterment of society. In SY 2022-2023, St. Mary’s College of Baliwag, Inc. continued to navigate the unprecedented pandemic year with great faith and unified force, facing a myriad of challenges and opportunities along the way. With God’s grace, mercy, and compassion, we emerged a stronger and more resilient community. With every challenge comes opportunity. This year afforded us an opportunity to continue upgrading our technology infrastructure for blended mode of learning delivery. Amid multiple crises, the academic community stepped up and worked together to make St. Mary’s College of Baliwag a safe and healthy school to ensure continuity of learning and apply the many lessons of this watershed moment in human history. With God’s never- ending love, SMCB, on its 110th year continued to IGNITE Quality Transformative Ignacian Marian Education (QTIME) and SHINE through Flexible Learning Arrangement and Modified Environment (FLAME) which provides students with innovative learning experiences the RVM way. In SY 2023-2024, we shifted to full face to face classes in December 2023. The following have been accomplished in preparation for full onsite classes: Installation of Wet Standpipe System with automatic fire sprinkler; Gatekeeping and Texting Module, a fully automatic turnstile which provides the perfect solution to eliminate entry of unwanted persons inside the school premises. It automatically sends messages to parents or guardians upon entry and exit. Text blasting capability is in place for faster information dissemination; E- Canteen which is a high technology Payment System using the same RFID card where students and personnel can enjoy the services of the school canteen. Parents, students, and personnel can load money using the same RFID card for payment transactions in the canteen. With its on-screen photo ID security feature, it also protects stolen or lost cards from being used by somebody else except the card owners themselves. The Physical Facilities Management Development Plan (PFMDP) is also regularly reviewed and periodically updated, thus, identifying critical components which include areas of skilled works/major and minor renovations, continual improvement/ preventive maintenance, technology and equipment, sustainable environment, and infrastructure. Guided by our vision mission and clear about targets, we pressed on our Ignacian Marian journey despite the odds of the past three years. We have come out of SY 2023-2024 rejuvenated and more deeply committed to serving the people the Lord has entrusted to our care. The previous school years reminded us that even through lean times, our Ignacian Marian spirit would keep us strong. We have been blessed by God in countless ways. We remain steadfast in our work and faithful to the legacy of our Foundress, Mother Ignacia Del Espiritu Santo. The legacy of Mother Ignacia has empowered us to be creative in dealing with problems that impact on our educational mission. We paused and reset our goals, plans and activities guided by our Ignacian core values of Faith, Excellence, and Service (FES). On our 111th year, we highlight the importance of moving forward together and re-ignite our conviction for Quality Transformative Ignacian Marian Education (QTIME), as we continue to hope, achieve, and grow in our shared journey as the only Catholic school in Baliuag, Bulacan. 3. THE SCHOOL SEAL "AM" stands for "Ave Maria" in praise of our Blessed Mother, the Patroness of the RVM Congregation. The rays signify the light and wisdom which emanate from the Blessed Virgin Mary. The sampaguita beneath the book, being the national flower, is symbolic of the RVM being a Filipino Congregation. The stars represent our Lady's many virtues. At the center of the seal is an open book bearing the Latin inscription "Initium Sapientiae Timor Domini" which in English means, "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." Appropriately, it has become the school's motto for it signifies filial fear, love, awe and profound reverence for the Divine Source of wisdom, grace and life. IV. THE RVM PHILOSOPHY OF EDUCATION RVM PHILOSOPHY OF EDUCATION St. Mary’s College of Baliuag adheres to the RVM Philosophy of Education aimed at leading all to the fullness of life in Jesus Christ. We believe that... * God is Father who, in abundant love and total graciousness, created humanity and all creation to share His love. * When humanity chose to live apart from God, in his tender mercy the Father sent His Son Jesus to show humanity the way back to Him to pursue the path of justice, truth and love. * The Father sent the Holy Spirit to sanctify, inspire, guide and enlighten everyone in following Jesus so that the will of God for the well-being of all may be fulfilled. * God chose Mary to be the Mother of Jesus, the Son of God and the Mother of the Church. Mary, being the first disciple, journeys with us to fullness of life in Jesus Christ. We believe that... * By the example set by Mother Ignacia del Espíritu Santo, the RVM Education proclaims that it is the heart that knows God, who is the source of all wisdom (cf. Prov. 2:6; 9:10; Job 28:20/23; Eccl 2:26; Ps 51:6; James 3:17-18). * Education is a life-long process whereby human persons grow and develop their potentials in the pursuit of their God- given mission of transforming all things in Jesus Christ. * Learning is growth for every person to become a witness to faith, excellence and service in varied socio-cultural settings; thus, participate in the transforming experience of life in Jesus Christ. * The school is where the process of growth is directed towards reverence for creation and persons, which fortifies the spirit of communion. * The students who are citizens of their times, unique with their own history, capacities and inspiration, have the sacred and the good, the promise and the potential for the actualization of the mission entrusted to them. * The Teachers are persons committed to the process of becoming whole and to the task of leading others to maturity in Jesus Christ. * The School Administrators are servant leaders committed to witnessing the Good News and to journey with the academic community in their search for truth, beauty and goodness. OUR MISSION is FULFILLED when our students: * understand and accept themselves and others; * develop their talents in service to family, society and Church; * think logically and critically and express themselves effectively; * know clearly what they believe and what they believe in; * believe and trust in Jesus Christ as their personal Savior; * love and honor MARY as their MOTHER and Model and Mother Ignacia as their inspiration and intercessor; * possess social awareness and a sense of responsibility for the common good; and * maintain physical fitness and mental health, avoiding excesses and abuses. We believe that success in school means more than good examination results. It means learning how to live as well as how to make a living. V. GOAL STATEMENTS As a Catholic School, SMCB works for the development of the whole person who recognizes one’s Christian role and responsibility as a builder of God’s Kingdom through constant encounter with Christ and others. As a Filipino School, SMCB is dedicated to the task of producing well-rounded citizens who can preserve and be a witness to relevant and wholesome Filipino culture, values and attitudes. As an RVM School, SMCB is committed to the formation of aware and responsible persons who are ever willing and ready to serve God and fellowmen especially the poor and underprivileged with Christ as the center of life, Mother Mary and Mother Ignacia del Espiritu Santo as inspiration and model. VI. IGNACIAN CORE and RELATED VALUES FAITH strong faith in God, prophetic witness to gospel values, nationalism, justice, communion EXCELLENCE discipline, integrity, self-reliance, competence, resourcefulness SERVICE preferential love for the poor, stewardship, humility, charity, courage Article I STATEMENT OF COMMITMENT Section 1 VISION (version 2022) We, the Ignacian Marian community of St. Mary's College of Baliuag, witness the compassionate love of God and advocate quality transformative education towards the fullness of life in Jesus Christ. Section 2 MISSION We commit ourselves to: 1. grow deeper in discernment and interior freedom and be prophetic witness of faith, hope and love in today's world; 2. continuously form Ignacian Marian leaders who witness to faith, excellence and service in varied socio-cultural settings; 3. constantly pursue innovative programs, approaches, and educational and technological strategies to develop global citizens; 4. build up resources and capabilities and create new paradigms to address social harmony toward a dignified life; and 5. expand our educational thrust for the poor. Section 3 KEY DIRECTIONS 1. Quality Transformative Ignacian Marian Education towards Service for the Common Good 2. Responsible Partnership and relevant institutional social programs to advance human fraternity towards a dignified life 3. Sustainable Programs to Favor the Disadvantaged Sectors of the Society Section 4 QUALITY POLICY (2022) College of God and wards the We, the whole community of St. Mary's College of Baliuag, commit ourselves to provide quality transformative Ignacian Marian Education in accordance with statutory and regulatory requirements. We shall work collaboratively to form witnesses to the compassionate love of Jesus, the Teacher, nurture excellence through lifelong learning and develop learners who address social harmony toward a dignified life. We shall do this by proactive and resilient leadership, solidarity and continual improvement of our organizational operation and performance through a quality management system. Section 5 QUALITY OBJECTIVES (Revised 2022) In the light of its Quality Policy, St. Mary's College of Baliuag aims to: 1. achieve quality assurance through a sustained and enhanced school management system with the adoption of ISO 9001:2015 and PAASCU standards. 2. deliver quality transformative Ignacian Marian Education responsive to the needs of college life as well as to the 21st century challenges through holistic curriculum and instruction. 3. deliver quality transformative Ignacian Marian Education responsive to local industry demands as well as global. professional standards through outcomes-based curriculum. research, and community extension 4. render quality administrative and support services responsive to the departmental needs for the attainment of Quality Transformative Ignacian Marian Education 5. provide quality service in terms of effective and collaborative budgeting, efficient and timely delivery of services and goods in aid of providing quality transformative Ignacian Marian Education Section 6 INSTITUTIONAL OBJECTIVES In the light of its Vision - Mission, St. Mary's College aims to develop graduates who are: 1. Christ-centered Ignacian Marians, committed to live in God's abundant love; 2. Mary's followers, living her virtues to attain fullness of life in Jesus Christ and to exemplify ethical and corporate responsibility in a humane society; 3. Faithful to the spirituality of Mother Ignacia in building the Church of the poor and paving the way towards inner and social transformation and reverence for creation and persons; 4. Proclaimers of a tradition of excellence and life-long learning; 5. Promoters of Filipino culture and Catholic traditions leading to holistic human development; 6. Servant leaders, adhering to the Christian concept of stewardship and communion; and 7. Matured individuals, imbued with faith and wisdom in searching for truth, beauty and goodness Section 7 OBJECTIVES OF THE PRE-SCHOOL EDUCATION (Revised 2024) Kindergarten Education espouses a learner-centered curriculum that aims to develop holistic learners equipped with foundational skills imbued with physical, social, emotional, cognitive, and values development. This is attained through play-based learning which is anchored on the developmentally - appropriate practices and theories with consideration of learners' expanding environment toward life-long learning. The kindergarten curriculum aims to produce active young Filipino learners who are holistically developed and equipped with 21st century skills. Hence, the Curriculum is designed to: • Foster development of learners' identity, social and emotional development, cognitive ability, physical health, and positive attitudes. •Develop learners' 21st century skills. •Provide learners with experiences that are actively engaging in meaning-making through hands-on activities. •Provide learners with varied opportunities to enjoy activities that are developmentally appropriate. •Stimulate learners' intellectual ability, creativity, communication skills, and critical thinking. •Enhance learners' spirit of teamwork through collaborative activities. •Foster learning experiences and content that are nationalistic and culturally responsive, compatible, and relevant to the learner. Section 8 OBJECTIVES OF THE GRADE SCHOOL AND JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL EDUCATION (Revised 2024) •The language curriculum aims to produce young Filipino learners who are literate (i.e., critical thinkers, readers, and writers), communicatively competent, and culturally aware. Through the curriculum, learners are able to use language appropriately, think critically, and communicate effectively in various social contexts. In turn, they are able to contribute productively to their community and to the larger society as multilingual, multiliterate, and intercultural citizens of the country, while developing a deep sense of cultural identity. •The main goal of the mathematics curriculum is for Filipino learners to become mathematically proficient and critical problem solvers. The development of mathematical proficiency among learners involves the development of confidence and competence in different aspects of mathematics and includes becoming increasingly aware of the value and usefulness of mathematics. •The overall goal of the Grades 3 to 10 Science curriculum is the achievement of scientific, environmental, and technology and engineering literacy of all learners. On achieving the outcomes of the curriculum, learners will be ready to actively participate in local, national, and global contexts and make meaningful contributions to a dynamic, culturally diverse, and expanding world. •Pangunahing layunin ng Makabansa na makahubog ng mag-aaral na mayroong pag-unawa sa sarili at kultural na kamalayan, kasanayan upang maging malusog at malikhain, at may kakayahang makipag-ugnayan sa kapwa at pamayanan. •Ang pangunahing tunguhin ng GMRC at VE ay makapaghubog ng kabataang Pilipino na nagpapasiya nang mapanagutan (accountable), kumikilos nang may wastong pag uugali at pagkiling sa kabutihan, at nagsasabuhay ng pagmamahal sa Diyos, sarili, pamilya at kapuwa, kalikasan, bansa, at daigdig tungo sa kabutihang panlahat (common good). • The goal of the MATATAG Music and Arts Education Curriculum is to develop a musically and artistically literate 21st-century learner. Participation in various creative expressions and production of different artworks foster the learner's multicultural literacy, critical perception, artistic and creative expression, and holistic national identity as a Filipino. Music and Arts further aims to develop, promote, and preserve local traditions and heritage while introducing learners to other cultural and artistic expressions from around the world through experiential and creative learning opportunities in their families, schools, and local, national, and international communities •The MATATAG Physical Education and Health curriculum is geared towards the development and attainment of physical and health literacy as well as 21st century skills that contribute to the well-being of the individual, family, community, improve the quality of life in society, and motivate them to take responsibility for their lifelong holistic health and well-being in a varied and rapidly changing society. •Ang Filipino ay isa sa pundamental na asignatura na naglilinang ng literasi, kakayahang komunikatibo, mapanuring pag-unawa sa iba't ibang uri ng teksto, at pagbuo ng multimodal na may lubos na pagpapahalaga sa wikang Filipino at ibang wika sa bansa, kultura, at mga teksto o mga babasahin na magiging daan sa kanyang pagkatuto at paglinang ng ika-21 siglong kasanayan para sa kapaki-pakinabang na pagganap bilang makabansa at global na mamamayan •The curriculum goal of Edukasyong Pantahanan at Pangkabuhayan (EPP)/Technology and Livelihood Education (TLE) is to equip learners with life-long learning skills that enable them to be productive individuals, ready for the world of work, and contribute to achieving national goals. EPP/TLE is a learning area that provides learners with basic home skills that will enable them to be productive in life. •Ang pangunahing layunin ng Araling Panlipunan ay maisakatuparan ang paglinang sa mga Pilipinong mag-aaral na maging mapanuri, mapagmuni, produktibo at mapanagutang kasapi ng lipunan na may sapat na kahusayang pansibiko na nakasalig sa malalim na pag-unawa sa pagkakakilanlang kultural at pagmamahal sa bansa na mayroong pandaigdigang pananaw at pagpapahalaga sa usaping panlipunan. Section 9 OBJECTIVES OF THE SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL (2018) A. Per Strand At the end of the Senior High School, the Ignacian Marians are expected to: 1. Demonstrate understanding of basic concepts and Physics; solve mathematical problems and and principles in Calculus, Biology, Chemistry, exhibit Christian and Scientific values in conducting research (STEM); 2. Exhibit skills in Organizational Management Accountancy, Business Mathematics and Finance, Research and Economics, and apply principles of marketing, business ethics and social responsibility in simulating business enterprise (ABM); 3. Show understanding of the disciplines and ideas in the Social Sciences such as Philippine Politics and Governance, World Religion, Community Engagement, Solidarity and Citizenship and apply the trends in the 21st Century in creating nonfiction and research. (HUMSS) B. Per Learning Area 1. Develop listening, reading, writing, speaking and responding skills and strategies for effective various situations communication (Communication); in 2. Read, interpret and write varied types of texts for research and academic purposes (Language) 3. Solve business-related problems involving rational, exponential and logarithmic functions and apply variance of a random variable and apply sampling logic to real-life situations; compute the mean and techniques and distributions to estimate population mean and proportion, to perform hypothesis testing on population mean and proportion, and to perform correlation and regression analyses on real-life problems (Mathematics); 4. Show understanding of their developmental stage as they make important career decisions and apply critical and analytical thinking skills to the affairs of daily life for the development of a more humane society (Philosophy); 5. Demonstrate understanding of the earth's history, formation, structure, composition, and processes as well as issues, concerns, and problems pertaining to the earth's resources. (Science) 6. Develop awareness of cultural, social and political dynamics, recognize cultural relativism and social inclusiveness to overcome prejudices, and demonstrate social competence to guide their interactions with groups, communities, networks, and institutions (Social Science); 7. Show awareness of the different disciplines in the Social Sciences and demonstrate competencies in interacting and relating with other individuals, groups, and communities (Humanities); and 8. Demonstrate understanding of physical and health literacy and acquire competencies that could support them to adopt and advocate an active life for fitness and health (PE and Health). Section 10 THE IGNACIAN MARIAN EXPECTATIONS It is the school's greatest concern to provide you the proper training with the sincere hope that you will become Catholic Ignacian Marian men and women ready to serve your home, your school, your community and your country. 10.1 BEHAVIOR. As an Ignacian Marian, you are expected to behave at all times, in and out of the school. Good manners and right conduct are the marks of a well-bred and well-educated person. a. Flag Ceremony. Attendance during the flag ceremony is required of everyone. There are signals to follow: a.1 First bell. Line formation: getting ready for the morning ceremony by maintaining silence and avoiding unnecessary movements. It is strongly recommended that you participate properly and actively in the prayers, hymns, and pledge. a.2 Second bell. Signals the start of the Morning Prayer. a.3 A signal is given for the students to get inside their classrooms. b. Angelus and 3 o'clock Prayer. When the signal for the Angelus and the 3 o'clock prayer is sounded, STOP whatever you are doing, stand erect and PRAY the Angelus or the 3 o'clock prayer. c. School Campus. SMCB is your second home. Keep the premises clean and orderly. You are entitled to use its facilities. Any damage or breakage by the students must be repaired or replaced at the expense of parents and guardians. Visitors or parents are permitted in school only on OFFICIAL BUSINESS, with an appointment letter from the Adviser and with due permission from the Principal. d. Classroom. Your good behavior manifested by acts of courtesy, politeness, and respect for the rights of others, cooperation, industry, obedience, and diligence, can do a lot to give you and your classmates a wholesome environment that will help enrich your school experiences. •The teacher's table is private. Never touch anything placed on it except when requested by your teacher. •Avoid removing or erasing any official announcements on chalkboards and bulletin boards without permission from an authority. •You are advised to leave the chairs and school materials clean and in order at all times. •Forcible and/or unauthorized entry in the classroom is strictly prohibited. •Learn to take care of your physical needs. You are advised to go to the comfort room, or buy school needs before classes, during break and after dismissal. Going out of the classroom should be done at the barest minimum time and with the permission of the teacher. •Gate pass duly signed by the Prefect of Discipline and Principal is issued upon your request to leave the school campus during class hours only when it is deemed necessary. Present and surrender your gate pass to the security guard at the gate upon leaving. •Comics, books, magazines and other printed materials other than those required for the academic program may not be brought to school or passed around except with expressed permission from your teacher. Otherwise, the material/s will be confiscated and endorsed to your adviser who in turn will be the one to return it to your parents. e. Corridors and Stairways •SILENCE must be observed while going up and down the school building. Racing and running up and down the stairs are not allowed. •Students must always keep right when passing through corridors and stairways. No loitering along the corridors during class hours and between periods is allowed. •Keep corridors and stairways clean. f. Chapel. You are expected to behave reverently in the chapel, this being a place of prayer and worship. •Refrain from eating, talking and making other unnecessary noises. •Wiping or touching statues are discouraged for hygienic purposes. g. Auditorium, Audio-Visual Room, MIDES Hall, Multi-Purpose Hall. •Go to the venue punctually to avoid distracting the speakers or performers and the audience. •Observe proper decorum during the program/activity (applauding properly, showing basic courtesy, etc.) •Refrain from shouting or making catcalls, going in and out of the venue, creating any disruptive behavior and other similar acts. •Eating is strictly prohibited inside the venue/s. •Maintain cleanliness of the venue at all times. h. Canteen. All students are required to follow these rules to maintain its cleanliness and orderliness. •Observe proper line formation when buying meals at the food counter. No jumping line must be done; everyone must wait for his/her turn. • "CLEAN AS YOU GO" (CLAYGO) policy: Students should clean up the table they used before leaving, putting used dishes in their proper place and throwing wrappers in the allotted trash can Proper waste segregation must be observed. •To reduce garbage and to ensure hygiene, everyone is enjoined to bring his/her own tumbler, spoon and fork. Bringing a lunch box for those who order food ahead of time and eat out of the canteen is also strongly encouraged. •Vandalism and other acts meant to cause damage to the utensils, fixtures and anything in the canteen and its premises will be sanctioned. i. Instructional Media Center (IMC). The IMC is a place for studying and doing research. •Observe silence and courtesy at all times. •Books and magazines are to be read and handled with care then returned properly on the shelves after reading. •Arrange the chairs and clean the table before leaving the place. j. Comfort Rooms •Use the assigned comfort rooms properly. •Flush or pour water into the toilet bowl after use. •Avoid squatting or stepping on the bowl. •Wrap properly and throw into the waste bin used napkins (for girls). •Refrain from writing on walls and doors. •Close the faucet/bidet after use and turn off the light. k. Laboratories. SMCB has the following laboratories: Speech Laboratory, Broadcasting Laboratory, Science Laboratories (Biology, Chemistry, and Physics), Computer Laboratories (E-Learning, GS, HS and SHS), TLE Laboratories (GS, HS, and Sewing Room). These are places where experiments, hands-on and other activities are performed. You are advised to handle all instruments and equipment with care. Always leave the room with everything clean and in order. 10.2 RELATIONSHIPS a.Student-Parent Relationship. Parents are partners of the school in the education of their children. Students must: •keep their parents constantly informed about their academic performance and activities: • give to them any written communication from the school; •encourage them to get involved with the Family Council and attend meetings in school; •seek their advice and help, if necessary, in dealing with academic or non-academic problems and make them feel free to confer with school authorities regarding these matters; •look up to them for inspiration and guidance. b. Student-Administration Relationship. The student - The administration relationship should be bound by mutual respect and cooperation. The students are expected to: •be sincere in their dealings with the administration and heed duly constituted authorities; •be devoted to their studies and follow rules and regulations, as well as constructive suggestions: •develop an attitude of self-reliance and openness in the pursuit of learning in the belief that the administration is exerting all efforts for their welfare; •have no hesitation to share suggestions for the improvement of the school through proper channels; •live up to the good name and expectations of the school by making the most of all opportunities given them. Student-Teacher Relationship. The Student Teacher relationship should also be based on mutual respect and cooperation. The students are expected to respect their teachers as the teachers respect them, feel free to discuss with their teachers, academic matters; •show thoughtfulness to their teachers by extending needed help; •avoid over familiarity in their dealing with their teachers; abstain from expecting undue favors or considerations from their teachers, especially in matters of grades; •respect the privacy of teachers, especially during inconvenient hours. d. Student-Student Relationship. Ignacian Marians should treat each other like brothers and sisters. They are expected to: •give due respect for the rights of their fellow students; •live and work as one under the inspiration of their Patroness, the Blessed Virgin Mary and Venerable Mother Ignacia del Espiritu Santo; •extend help willingly and for the good purpose, •speak moderately and gently because it is a sign of fine breeding; •respect the property of their fellow students; •avoid quarrels and misunderstanding by being more considerate and tactful. e. Student-Personnel Relationship. The various personnel of the school perform services, which make student learning easier and more convenient. Hence, the students can show appreciation by giving them due respect, courtesy and consideration. The students are expected to: •maintain a cheerful disposition in dealing with the school personnel; •help them in their work by maintaining cleanliness and orderliness on campus; •say polite expressions like "Thank You" and Please" to any assistance given them; •ask permission from the school authorities regarding the borrowing or using of school property and facilities; •avoid idle talks with them so as not get in the way of their work; •address them as "Kuya" or "Ate" as a sign of respect. ARTICLE II ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES Section 10 ADMISSION OF NEW STUDENTS AND TRANSFEREES 1.1 Criteria for Selection 1.1.1 Passing grade in all subjects in the final rating 1.1.2 No disciplinary record 1.1.3 A satisfactory result in interviews 1.2 Admission Requirements for NEW STUDENTS Age requirement: ✓ Incoming Junior Kindergarten: Four (4) years old by September ✓ Incoming Senior Kindergarten: Five (5) years old by September ✓ Incoming Grade One (1): Six (6) years old by September (DepEd Order 16 & 37 s. 2015. Regardless of age, the student must have Learner Reference Number LRN) • Original and photocopy of Birth Certificate from the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) • Original and photocopy of Baptismal Certificate • Form 138 (Report Card) • Certificate of Good Moral Character and/or a letter of recommendation from the Principal of the school last attended • 1 x 1 ID picture • Medical and physical examinations (when necessary) 1.3 Admission and Readmission Requirements for OLD STUDENTS • Old students of SMCB shall automatically be admitted to the next grade level provided that they have no failing grades. • A student with a failing grade in one or two learning areas may be admitted to the next grade level if s/he passed the remedial class. Otherwise, the learner is retained in the same grade level. • A student who failed in three or more learning areas shall be retained in the same grade level. • A student recommended to be 'Admitted on Probation' must agree to the conditions and terms stipulated in the Contract of Agreement signed by the parents/guardian of the student, the student concerned, the Prefect of Discipline, the Principal, and the President. • A student who transferred to another school and seeks readmission shall be considered a new student; hence s/he must comply with the admission requirements. 1.4 Admission requirements of Foreign Students and Filipino Students from Abroad • Scholastic records from the school of origin • Original and photocopy of passport • For aliens, latest copy of Alien Certificate of Registration (ACR) and a Special Study Permit (SSP) from the Bureau of Immigration • Original and photocopy of birth certificate (from Philippine Statistics Authority) and baptismal certificate • 1 x 1 ID picture • Medical and physical examination certificate (when necessary) • Grade Eight (8) students shall take Filipino 7 and Araling Panlipunan 7 • Grade Nine (9) students shall take Filipino 7 and 8 and Araling Panlipunan 7 The transfer credentials required for the enrollment of a student in case of transfer at the beginning of a school year shall be. a. For admission to Grade 2 of the elementary course up to the first year of any collegiate program or course, the uncancelled report card (Form 138) or its equivalent from the school last attended with the eligibility certificate indicated and signed by the authorized school official. The report card or its equivalent shall be deemed cancelled upon the enrollment of the student in the subsequent grade or year, and the admitting school shall immediately request for the permanent school record (Form 137) from the school last attended. b. Where a student is unable to present the required school records or credentials, a certificate of eligibility issued by the Secretary of the Department of Education or his/her duly authorized representative will be required. (Chapter IV, K, Title II (Enrollment of Students) Section 121 (Admission Credentials) Sarmiento, 2011, p.609. "Compendium of Education Legislation for Private Basic Education.") Section 2 WITHDRAWAL Students may withdraw from the school any time during the school year. They must follow the procedures below. 2.1 Inform the Registrar's Office of the intent to withdraw from the school 2.2 Secure and fill up Withdrawal Form from the same office 2.3 Have the filled-up form signed by the Principal, Class Adviser, Librarian, Guidance Coordinator, Student Activity Coordinator, and the Registrar. 2.4 Settle the following accounts: a. all unpaid school accounts and other financial obligations b. other financial obligations 2.5 Present Official Receipt (OR) to the Registrar who will release Form 138 (Report Card) 2.6 The Cashier will affix her signature after all accounts have been settled. Section 3 REFUNDS A student who transfers or withdraws after the beginning of classes and who has already paid pertinent tuition and other school fees may be charged as specified: • 10% of the total amount paid if s/he withdraws within the first week of classes. • 20% of the total amount paid if s/he withdraws within the second week of classes. • No refund of the total amount paid if s/he withdraws within the third and fourth week of classes. • The student is charged in full the total amount due if s/he withdraws after the second week of classes. However, if the transfer or withdrawal is due to justifiable cause, s/he shall only be charged the fees applicable until her/his last month of attendance (Sec. 100. ELPS Rev. Ed 2009). Note: The reservation fee is non-refundable. The enrollment of students in every private school shall be conducted during the registration days indicated on the approved calendar and subject to the following rules: a. When a student registers in a school, it is understood that he is enrolling for the entire school year for elementary and secondary courses. b. Aside from the specified registration period, a student may enroll and be admitted in accordance with the reasonable rules of the school for late enrollment but which in no case shall exceed two weeks after the opening of classes. c. After the two-week period above-mentioned, no further enrollment will be allowed without prejudice, however, to subsequent transfer by an enrolled student from one school to another during the school year, provided the consent of both schools is obtained. As a general rule, inter-school transfers after the enrollment period are discouraged, especially in cases of students who are expected to graduate during the school year at the secondary level of formal education. d. No student shall be officially enrolled unless he/she presents the proper school credentials on or before the end of the enrollment period for the school term. e. A student is deemed officially enrolled after he/she has submitted his appropriate admission or transfer credentials, made an initial payment of his/her school fees, has been accepted by the school, and has been authorized to attend classes in the school. f. For purposes of enrollment, the name and other personal data or circumstances of each student as indicated on the certificate or alien certificate of registration, where applicable, shall prevail. (Chapter IV, K (Enrollment of Students) Section 118 (Registration) (Sarmiento, 2011, p.605 "Compendium of Education Legislation for Private Basic Education")) Section 4 SCHOLARSHIP GRANTS The school gives incentives to deserving students who have proven worth in academic, conduct, and co-curricular performance. 4.1 General Policies for Scholarship Grants 1. Applicants can avail themselves of the type of financial assistance they applied for as long as they passed all the requirements for such scholarship grants as determined by the Committee. 2. Scholars could continue receiving financial assistance if they passed all the requirements to maintain such scholarship. 3. A Conduct Grade of at least 85 is required to maintain the scholarship. 4.2 Criteria and Requirements to Qualify for Scholarship 1. Tuition Fee Subsidy Applicants for this type of scholarship must NOT have grades lower than 85 in Conduct and in all subjects. Their family's annual gross income should not be more than the poverty threshold as determined by NEDA and confirmed through a certification from the Barangay Chairman and a validly filed Income Tax Return. Grade 10 students ranked 3rd to 10th place from identified public junior high schools must submit a certificate signed by the principal stating their general average and rank. They should NOT have grades below 85 in conduct and in all subjects.4.3 Scholarship Grants. There are five (5) types of financial importance 1. ACADEMIC SCHOLARSHIP. This is designed for high-achieving old and new students from Grade 1 to Grade 12. It provides opportunities for qualified grantees to avail of tuition fee discounts and/or privileges. a. Full tuition fee privilege is granted to first honors or rank 1 in the batch. b. Half tuition fee privilege is granted to second honors or rank 2 in the batch. Transferees for both grants will have to present a certification of the rank from the principal of the previous school. 2. TUITION FEE SUBSIDY. This is awarded to deserving students to defray partly the cost of their tuition fee. a. The number of the grantees will be based on the 3% to 5% total school population as mandated by the RVM General Chapter. b. Application is open to all students from Grade 1 to Grade 12 in the Basic Education Department and to students taking up Bachelor in Elementary and Secondary Education only. c. Granted recipients may reapply for continued assistance in subsequent years as long as they meet the set standards stated in the MISFAP Memorandum of Agreement such as conduct grade not lower than 85. d. Applicant's family's annual gross income should NOT BE more than the poverty threshold determined by NEDA and confirmed through a certification from the Barangay Chairman and a validly filed Income Tax Return. e. Depending on the availability of funds, Grade 10 students ranked 3rd to 10th place may avail of financial assistance in Senior High School. Such students should not have grades below 85 in Conduct and in all subjects. 3. GRANT-IN-AID a. Grade 1 to Grade 12 students from the Basic Education who will qualify can avail of the grant-in-aid. b. Students of the Education Programs are qualified to avail of a 25% or a 50% tuition discount. c. Incoming college freshmen recommended and endorsed by the Parish Priest may be granted tuition discounts if they do not have grades below 85 in Conduct and in all subjects. d. Grade 7 to Grade 10 students may avail of the Education Service Contracting (ESC) of the Government. e. Senior High School students are granted financial help through the Voucher System of the Government. 4. STUDENT ASSISTANT (for College Students only) Incoming Education students who passed the qualifying examinations and interviews will be accepted as student assistants. (See the qualifications of Student Assistance) b. Students accepted to the program will be required to render services to the school during their free day and time. 5. OTHER FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE a. Family Discounts. For families who have four or five children, all currently enrolled in SMCB, the youngest will be given a 20% discount on tuition fee. b. Victims of Calamities. A student who is a victim of a calamity may avail of a scholarship grant through the proper endorsement of her/his Barangay Captain. c. Children of Personnel (Marian Scholarship). Any SMCB employee who has rendered at least three (3) years of continuous service to the school can avail of tuition fee discounts: 100% free tuition fee for the eldest child, 75% discount for the second child; 50% discount for the third child and 25% discount for the fourth child. A grade requirement of 85 in Conduct is needed to maintain the scholarship. Unmarried personnel who want to avail of this privilege for a sibling or a first-degree nephew/niece may do so only after their 10th year of service. A grade requirement of 85 in Conduct is needed to maintain the scholarship. d. Alumni Association Scholarship Program. The Association provides varied scholarships to deserving students. The Association coordinates with the school's Scholarship Committee for identification, monitoring, and evaluation of their scholars' performance. All inquiries about their scholarship program can be coursed through the Alumni Office. e. Loyalty Discount. Students who have studied in SMCB from Kindergarten or Grade 1 to Grade 12 can avail of a 25% tuition fee discount if they will continue to study in the College Department of SMCB (for all courses except the Nursing Program). To maintain this privilege, they must not fail any subject and must have a good record in the school. f. Tuition Discounts for Varsity Players. Varsity Players in GS, Junior and Senior High School and College can avail of tuition fee discount: 1. District: 5% discount on Tuition Fee after deducting any government subsidy 2. Provincial: 7% discount on Tuition Fee after deducting any government subsidy 3. Regional: 10% discount on Tuition Fee after deducting any government subsidy 4. Palarong Pambansa: 15% discount on Tuition Fee after deducting any government subsidy Requirement: • No grades below 85 in Conduct and in all subjects. • Must win first, second, or third place to avail of discount in the desired level. ARTICLE III ACADEMIC POLICIES Section 1 The MATATAG Curriculum The Basic Education Curriculum of SMCB follows the MATATAG Curriculum of the Department of Education, which is a recalibrated K to 10 curriculum under the K to 12 program. MATATAG stands for MAke the curriculum relevant to produce job-ready, active, and responsible citizens TAke steps to accelerate the delivery of basic education services and provision facilities TAke good care of learners by promoting learner well-being, inclusiveness learning, and positive learning environment Give support for teachers to teach better Progression of Learning Areas Grade 1: Five Subjects Language, Reading & Literacy, Makabansa, Mathematics, GMRC/CL Grade 2: Five Subjects Makabansa, Mathematics, GMRC/CL, English, Filipino Grade 3: Six Subjects Makabansa, Mathematics, GMRC/CL, English, Filipino, Science Grade 4-6: Eight Subjects Mathematics, GMRC/CL, English, Filipino, Science, MAPEH, Araling Panlipunan, EPP Grade 7-10: Eight Subjects Mathematics, VE/CL, English, Filipino, Science, Araling Panlipunan, MAPEH, TLE Phases of Implementation SY 2024-2025 SY 2025-2026 SY 2026-2027 SY 2027-2028 Kinder Grade 2 Grade 3 Grade 10 Grade 1 Grade 5 Grade 6 Grade 4 Grade 8 Grade 9 Grade 7 Section 2 The Preschool Curriculum and its Grading System The Preschool Curriculum includes five (5) learning areas: Language Literacy, Filipino, Mathematics, Physical Education and Health, and Christian Living/Good Manners and Right Conduct (CL/GMRC). Developmental Domains Developmental domains refer to specific aspects of growth and changes in children. The major domains of development are physical, cognitive, language, and social-emotional. These developmental domains are unique to kindergarten and can be developed across the Learning Areas. The contents of each developmental domain are defined by learning expectations, as follows: 1. Literacy, Language, and Communication. Learners are expected to develop communicative skills in their first languages. They are expected to develop more positive attitudes toward reading and writing, and to view themselves as effective users and learners of the language. This domain provides opportunities for early literacy learning for self-expression through language using the mother tongue or the child’s first language as a literacy resource. 2. Socio-Emotional Development. Learners are expected to develop emotional skills, basic concepts pertaining to themselves, how to relate well with other people in their immediate environment, demonstrate awareness of one's social identity, and appreciate cultural diversity among the school, community, and other people. 3. Values Development. Learners are expected to demonstrate positive attitudes, self-concept, respect, concern for self and others, behave appropriately in various situations and places, and manifest love for our creator, country, and fellowmen. These learning expectations are to be taught with the integration of Good Manners and Right Conduct (GMRC) as stipulated in Republic Act 11476. 4. Physical Health and Motor Development. Learners are expected to develop both their fine and gross motor skills to be efficient and effective movers when engaging in wholesome physical and health activities. They are also expected to acquire an understanding of good health habits and develop their awareness about the importance of safety and how they protect themselves from harm at home, in school, and in public places. 5. Aesthetic/Creative Development. Learners are expected to develop their aesthetic sense and creative expression through drawing, painting, and manipulative activities. Aesthetic development involves the love and pursuit of beauty in art, music, and movement, and creates opportunities for the creative expression of emotions, thoughts, feelings, and ideas. 6. Cognitive Development. Learners are expected to develop thinking skills, and insights into patterns of mathematics, concepts of numbers, length, capacity, mass, and time using concrete objects or materials, and apply these meaningfully in their daily experiences through the provision of varied manipulative activities to help them see relationships and interconnections in math and enable them to deal flexibly with mathematical ideas and concepts. Moreover, learners are also expected to demonstrate a basic understanding of concepts pertaining to living and nonliving things, including weather, and use these in categorizing things Page 8 of 33 in their environment. They are also expected to acquire the essential skills and sustain their natural curiosity in their immediate environment through exploration, discovery, observation, and relate their everyday experiences using their senses (touch, sight, smell, taste, and hearing). 7. Kindergarten Grading System. There shall be four (4) grading periods using the averaging method. This means that there are no limits given to the grades so that a student gets the mark s/he deserves for the quarter. Furthermore, s/he can get a grade as high as 99% or as low as 70% depending on her/his performance. Quarterly and Final Grades per subject is expressed in whole numbers. The grade in each learning area will be based on certain criteria weighted accordingly as follows: 1. LANGUAGE LITERACY AND FILIPINO Written Work 30% * Seatworks * Quizzes * Exercises Performance Task 50% * Creative Work * Daily Recitation * Group Interaction * Oral Reading Test Quarterly Assessment 20% * Unit Test * Periodical Test 2. MATHEMATICS Written Work 40% * Seatworks * Quizzes * Exercises Performance Task 40% * Creative Work * Daily Recitation * Group Interaction * Oral Reading Test Quarterly Assessment 20% * Unit Test * Periodical Test 3. PE and Health Written Work 20% * Seatworks * Quizzes * Seatwork Performance Task 60% * Singing * Art Work * Motor Skills Development Quarterly Assessment 20% * Unit test * Periodical Test * CL/GMRC Written Work 30% * Seatworks * Quizzes * Exercises Performance Task 50% * Creative Work * Daily Recitation * Group Interaction * Conduct Quarterly Assessment 20% * Unit Test * Periodical Test Kindergarten Honors and Awards (Based on DepEd Order No. 36, s. 2016) Any member of the kindergarten class is eligible to be a candidate for Highest Achievers/ Honors if s/he meets the following requirements: * Conduct grade not lower than 85% in any subject per grading period * Academic grade not lower than 85% in any subject. At the end of the school year, the following awards/citations are given to deserving pupils. 1. Academic Excellence Awards: Academic Excellence Awards Average per Quarter Medal/Ribbon With Highest Honors 98-100 Gold With High Honors 95-97 Silver With Honors 90-94 Bronze 2. Conduct Merit 3. Special Awards 1. Number Smart 2. Word Smart 3. Music Smart 4. Body Smart 5. People Smart 6. Nature Smart 7. Self Smart 8. Visual Smart 9. Best in Pennanship 10. Others Quarterly Recognition. Merit Certificates are awarded during the Quarterly Recognition. 1. Academic Merit 2. Conduct Merit 3. Perfect Attendance Merit Section 3 The Basic Education Curriculum and its Grading System 2.1 GRADE 1 TO GRADE 6 Curriculum The Grade School has adopted the MATATAG curriculum for Grades 1 to 6 towards the attainment of functional literacy. The following are the subjects for Grade School: Grade 1: Language, Reading & Literacy, Makabansa, Mathematics, GMRC/CL Grade 2: Makabansa, Mathematics, GMRC/CL, English, Filipino Grade 3: Makabansa, Mathematics, GMRC/CL, English, Filipino, Science Grade 4-6: Mathematics, GMRC/CL, English, Filipino, Science, MAPEH, Araling Panlipunan, EPP Note: Grade levels that are not yet scheduled to implement the MATATAG curriculum will follow the subjects under the former K to 12 Curriculum. 2.2 GRADE 7 to GRADE 10 (Junior High School) Curriculum The Junior High School (Grade 7 to Grade 10) follows the recalibrated K to 10 Curriculum which aims to create a functional basic education system that will produce productive and responsible citizens equipped with the essential competencies and skills for both life-long learning and employment. The following are the subjects for Junior High School: * Christian Living/Values Education * Filipino * English * Mathematics * Science * Araling Panlipunan * Technology and Livelihood Education/Computer * Music, Arts, Physical Education, and Health 2.3 GRADE 11 and GRADE 12 (Senior High School) Curriculum Senior High School (SHS) covers the last two years of the K to 12 program. In Grades 11 and 12, students will go through a core curriculum and subjects under a track and strand of their choice. The following are the strands offered by SMCB to Senior High School under the Academic Track: A. STEM: Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics B. ABM: Accountancy, Business and Management C. HUMSS: Humanities and Social Sciences 2.4 THE GRADING SYSTEM: AVERAGING 2.4.1 GRADE 1 to GRADE 10 A. For Academics: * There are four (4) grading periods in a school year. * The grade per quarter is computed based on the grade allocation per subject. Hence, a quarter grade is independent from another. * The averaging method is used in obtaining the final marks. Example: First Quarter = 85 Second Quarter = 87 Third Quarter = 87 Fourth Quarter = 86 The final grade is = 86.25 * The quarterly grades per subject are expressed in whole numbers. The final grade per subject is expressed up to the last two decimal places. * Two (2) major examinations per quarter are given: a Unit Test and a Periodical Test. The grade in each learning area is based on certain criteria weighted accordingly as follows: 1. CHRISTIAN LIVING (Grade 1 to Grade 10) A. Written Works 30% * Seatworks * Quizzes * Reflection Paper * Assignments/Exercises B. Performance Tasks 50% * Group Activities/Projects (Quarterly) * Oral Test * Daily Recitation * Conduct C. Quarterly Assessment 20% * Unit Test * Periodical Test 2. Language, Reading Literacy (Grade 1) English and Filipino (Grade 2 to Grade 10) A. Written Works 30% * Seatworks * Quizzes * Themes/Creative writing * Assignments/Exercises * Reflection/Journal B. Performance Tasks 50% * Group Activities/Projects (Quarterly) * Oral Test * Daily Recitation C. Quarterly Assessment 20% * Unit Test * Periodical Test 3. MATHEMATICS (Grade 1 to Grade 10) A. Written Works 40% * Seatworks * Quizzes * Assignments/Exercises B. Performance Tasks 40% * Projects (Quarterly) * Mental Computation * Daily Recitation C. Quarterly Assessment 20% * Unit Test * Periodical Test 4. SCIENCE (Grade 3 to Grade 10) A. Written Works 40% * Seatworks * Quizzes * Exercises/Assignments B. Performance Tasks 40% * Projects (Quarterly) * Laboratory work * Recitation C. Quarterly Assessment 20% * Unit Test * Periodical Test 5. MAKABANSA (Grade 1 to Grade 3) Araling Panlipunan (Grade 4 to Grade 10) A. Written Works 30% * Seatworks * Quizzes * Exercises/Assignments /Reflection Paper B. Performance Tasks 50% * Projects (Quarterly) * Position paper * Recitation C. Quarterly Assessment 20% * Unit Test * Periodical Test 6. EPP / TLE/ Computer A. Written Works 20% * Seatworks * Quizzes * Exercises/Assignments B. Performance Tasks 60% * Practical Test * Project * Recitation C. Quarterly Assessment 20% * Unit Test * Periodical Test 7. MAPEH (Grade 1 to Grade 10) A. Written Works 20% * Seatworks * Quizzes * Exercises/Assignments B. Performance Tasks 60% * Practical Test * Oral/Singing Test * Artworks * Playing Musical Instrument * Recitation C. Quarterly Assessment 20% * Unit Test * Periodical Test 8. COMPUTER A. Written Works 30% * Seatworks * Quizzes * Exercises/Assignments B. Performance Tasks 50% * Projects (Quarterly) * Hands-on activities * Recitation C. Quarterly Assessment 20% * Unit Test * Periodical Test 2.4.2. GRADE 11 and GRADE 12 (Senior High School) A. For Academics * There are two (2) semesters in a school year. * The grade per semester is computed based on the Grade allocation per subject. Hence, a semester grade is independent from another. * Two quarters determine the FINAL GRADE in a semester. * The averaging method is used in obtaining the final marks. Example: First Semester: First Quarter = 85 Second Quarter = 87 The final grade is = 86 * The grading system for Senior High School (SHS) follows a different set of weights for each component as specified in the table below. Academic Track Core Subjects All other subjects Research Subjects, Work Immersion Written Works 25% 25% 35% Performance Tasks 50% 45% 40% Quarterly Assessments 25% 30% 25% Section 4 CHARACTER and CONDUCT GRADE The character grade checklist from SK to Grade 12 uses the following rating scale: 5 Exceptional / Strongly Observed (SO) 4 Exemplary/Always Observed (AO) 3 At Standard/Often Observed (OO) 2 Developing/Sometimes Observed (SS) 1 Needs Improvement/ Rarely Observed (RO) RATING SCALE DESCRIPTION INDICATOR 1 Needs Improvement/ Never Observed (NO) Value is undeveloped or needing improvement and not observable in action, words and behavior. 2 Developing/Rarely Observed (RO) Value is in the process of developing and acquiring as observed in action, words and behavior. 3 At Standard/Often Observed (OO) Value is observable within the acceptable standard. It is repeatedly done as manifested in words, action and behavior. 4 Exceptional/ Always Observed (AO) Value is exceptional and habitually manifested in words, action and behavior. The learner has the capability to serve as a role model. 5 Exemplary/Strongly Observed (SO) Value is exemplary, habitually done and naturally manifested in words, action and behavior. The learner has the capability to serve as role model and the power to inspire others to exemplify the value. Values in the checklist for Senior Kindergarten: 1. Courtesy: Shows respect to others, children and adults alike 2. Cleanliness/Neatness: Neat and tidy in one’s body, personal things and schoolwork 3. Honesty: Shows sincerity in words and action 4. Industry: Demonstrates diligence in school tasks and activities 5. Obedience: Acts in accordance with set rules and complies to teacher’s instruction 6. Cooperation: Manifests desire to help in any group work or class activity Values in the checklist for Grades 1-12: 1. Strong Faith in God: A trait showing deep love and concern of God, strong faith/ beliefs and religious practices 2. Witness to Gospel Values: A manifestation of a conviction in the light of the gospel values 3. Nationalism: Trait that champions/supports in many possible ways devotion and loyalty to the nation and the best of all that is Filipino 4. Justice: Rightfulness or lawfulness guided by truth and reason: treating all persons equally, fairly and objectively regardless of who they are and what they have in life 5. Communion: The character that focuses on making connections, promoting teamwork and collaboration to create harmony in the midst of diversity 6. Integrity: A mark of moral or ethical uprightness, of unquestionable character and adherence to ethical principles and honor. 7. Competence: The ability to perform well to meet or go beyond the given standards; adequate knowledge, skills and ability to undertake a task effectively 8. Resourcefulness: The ability and means to meet situations effectively despite limited resources 9. Discipline. A quality of self-control in thoughts, words and actions anywhere all the time, alone or with others; behavior in accord with rules of conduct maintained by training and control. 10. Self-reliance. Independence, freedom from influence or control of others in anything one does for the good of the self and others 11. Stewardship. Trait showing care in the use of materials & resources for effective results 12. Humility. Modesty and the practice of simplicity in everything about the person despite one's achievement and/or status in life 13. Charity. Kind interest in others in their difficult situations with the aim to help or lessen the predicament they are in 14. Courage. Bold/brave act to make something happen for the good of self and others despite hardships or difficulties 15. Preferential love for the poor. Manifestation of deep and real concern of and purposeful response to the plight of the poor (For more details, please see Ignacian Values Masterchart in the Appendix) SECTION 5 HONORS AND AWARDS The following are the honors, awards and merits given during Quarterly Recognition and Annual Graduation and Recognition. 1. Academic Excellence Award a. Academic Excellence is given to learners from Grades 1 to 12 who met the following requirements: * General Average of at least 90% * Conduct grade not lower than 85% in any subject per grading period * No grade lower than 85% in any subject, in current grading period b. Honor students shall be designated With Highest Honors, With High Honors, and With Honors. During the awarding, their names shall be called per category based on alphabetical order. Refer to the table below for the required grade per category. Academic Excellence Awards Average per Quarter Ribbon/Medal With Highest Honors 98-100 Gold With High Honors 95-97 Silver With Honors 90-94 Bronze c. Academic performance is based on the student’s grade point average (GPA) in all learning areas. • Compute the final grade of each learning area using the exact numerical equivalent in three decimal places of the four quarterly grades. • Get the average of all learning areas (up to three decimal places). • In order to compute the general average, the exact numerical equivalent of the student’s final ratings across subjects shall be used. 2. Conduct Merit/Award * Conduct merit is awarded to students who have earned a final conduct rating of 93% or above. * Year-end conduct merit shall be based on the general average computed to three decimal places. * To compute the general average, the exact numerical equivalent of the student’s final ratings across subjects shall be used. The quarterly final grade on Character and * Conduct is taken from the average of grades given by all subject teachers to the students. 3. Co-curricular Award (year-end only) * Gold, silver, and bronze medals are awarded to the top three students who have excelled in co-curricular activities authorized by the school during the school year. * The students’ performance and degree of involvement in activities, participation and awards won in contests during the curricular year are measured by the point system set by the school based on DepEd Order 74, s. 2012. * Co-curricular performance covers the achievements of the candidates at all levels (school, district, division, regional, national, international) in four areas namely: * Student Leadership (SL) / Officership and Membership * Official Contests and Competitions (CC) * Campus Journalism * Participation or Attendance (in DepED/school recognized seminar, camp, exchange programs, training, conference, workshop and other similar activities) Point System for Co-Curricular Achievement (Revised SY 2023-2024) DepEd Order #74, s. 2012 Requirements for Co-Curricular Performance * Each candidate must present and submit certified true copies of all documentary and evidentiary requirements of her/his co-curricular achievement. * The Moderator/Coach and STAC validate the evidence presented by the candidate. * The class adviser totals the number of points garnered and ranks the candidates accordingly. 4. Homeroom Leadership This is awarded to a student per classroom per grade level with the following qualifications: * of good moral character; * not have any disciplinary case; * have gained the respect of her/his peers and teachers; * have shown a sincere willingness to be a good follower first and foremost before becoming a leader; * have expressed an exemplary sense of leadership coupled with humility and the sincere desire to serve the school community. Rank 1 per section in the heterogeneous group. This is the student who will emerge the highest in the final grade in the section. 5. Multiple Intelligence Awards This is awarded to a student per grade level who showed extraordinary use of their Multiple Intelligence. 6. Best in Christian Living (Boy and Girl) This is awarded to the students per grade level with the following qualifications. The candidate must: * have the highest final grade in Christian Living; * not have any disciplinary case from first to fourth quarter; * be a practicing Catholic in and out of the school. 7. Best in Computer This is awarded to the students per grade level with the following qualifications and the candidate must: * have the highest final grade in Computer; * have shown exemplary performance in the use of computer; * not have any disciplinary case from the first to fourth quarter. 8. Best in Technology and Livelihood Education (TLE) This is awarded to the students per grade level with the following qualifications: * have the highest final grade in TLE; * have shown exemplary skills in baking and/or cooking; * not have any disciplinary case from the first to fourth quarter. 9. Best in Pennmanship This is awarded to a student per grade level who observes correct letter formation, neatness and orderliness in all her/his written works. 10. Service Award This is awarded to a student who has rendered selfless services to the school and the community. Listed below are the services recognized by the school. a. Service in the school * Glee Club service * Liturgical Alliance service * Mother Ignacia service * Student Government service * Eco-ambassadors service * Salindayog service b. Service in the community * Service in the parish * Service in the municipal government 11. Perfect Attendance This is awarded to a student who is present in all of his/her classes and with no record of tardiness for the entire school year. Students who represented the school for various purposes (e.g., in-school or off-campus activities) are qualified to receive this award. 12. Most Punctual This is awarded to students/s who is/are always prompt and early in going to school and in all classes, school activities and assembly as well as in the submission of school requirements. 13. Outstanding Club Member This is awarded to a club member who has shown exemplary skills/ talents in relation to her/his club activities. The student must not have any disciplinary case from the first to the fourth quarter of the current school year. 14. Optional Awards (For Grades 6, 10, and 12 only) a. Mother Ignacia Excellence Award This is awarded to a graduating student. To qualify, the student must: * be of good moral character; * not have any disciplinary case; * be a practicing Catholic in and out of the school; * have embodied the charism of Mother Ignacia del Espíritu Santo in her/his joyful disposition towards study, charity in serving her/his fellow Students and the greater community. * have manifested her great love for the Church and her/his Ignacian Marian heritage. b. Writer of the Year/Journalist of the Year This is awarded to a graduating student with the following qualifications: * Must be active contributor to the school organ * Has competed and won at least two (2) to three (3) awards in writing competitions outside the campus c. Artist of the Year This is awarded to a graduating student who has competed and won at least two awards in art competitions outside the campus. d. Athlete of the Year This is awarded to a graduating student who has the following qualifications: * has conformed with the school rules and regulations; * has competed and won the most number of awards (first, second or third place) in any regional or national sports competitions E. Outstanding Performance in Specific Disciplines These awards are given to recognize students who have exhibited exemplary skills and achievements in specific disciplines. These disciplines are Athletics, Arts, Communication Arts, Mathematics and Science, Social Sciences, and Technical-Vocational Education (Tech-Voc). 15. Special Awards for Grade 12 a. Award for Work Immersion. This award is given to students who have exemplified outstanding performance based on the terms of reference or engagement set by the school and evaluation of the direct supervisor and subject teacher. b. Award for Research or Innovation. This award for Research or Innovation is specific to the SHS tracks. Grade 12 graduating students - individuals, pairs, or groups of not more than four members, must have led the planning and execution of a research or innovation to advance the potential applications of technology, or research whose findings can be used to drive better efficiency and productivity as well as to improve the lives of the people in the school and/ or community. Guidelines on the Selection of Honors and Other Awards * Deliberation of honors shall be done by the School Selection Committee (SSC) composed of the advisers, grade level teachers, Subject Area Coordinator/s and Academic or SHS Coordinator/ Principal and/or her/his designated representative. * Any member of the School Selection Committee (SSC) must not be related within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity to any of the candidates for honors. * Results of the deliberation for Academic Excellence shall be presented by the grade level lead adviser and the Academic/SHS Coordinator to the candidates for honors in grade 7 to 12 and to the parents of the candidates for honors in kindergarten to grade 6. * In case of a protest, the candidate for honors together with his/her parents or guardian shall file the complaint to the School Head within five (5) working days from the final announcement of honors. This shall be settled by the SSC within five (5) working days from the filing of the protest. Settlement or protest should be made not later than three (3) days before graduation. * Announcement of honors is made by the principal and/or the members of the Basic Education Council at least 10 working days before Graduation/ Recognition Day. Previous guidelines inconsistent with the above items are hereby rescinded and/or repealed. * Note: a. Any academic merit recipient who commits any disciplinary infraction that calls for a violation report as a sanction loses the academic merit for the affected conduct merit in the preceding quarter/s. b. Gross disciplinary infraction disqualifies the student merits for the rest of the school year as well as the Year end awards on academic and conduct merits. c. Each private school may adopt its own criteria for the selection of students who should be awarded graduation honors in a recognized program or course, which criteria should be made known to its students. (Chapter IV, K, Title VI (Graduation) Section 152 (Graduation Honors in General) [Sarmiento, 2011, p.727. "Compendium of Education Legislation for Private Basic Education.") Section 6 ACADEMIC PROBATION The Principal’s Office issues an Academic Probation notice to a student and her/his parents to the fact that her/his academic performance falls short of the standard of achievement set for her/his year level. A student on Academic Probation status is encouraged to perform better given all the help at a given period of time, otherwise s/he will be advised to transfer to another school at the end of the school year. Who is placed under Probation Status? a. A student who incurs a grade of 74 and below in any subject b. A student who is retained in the same grade level c. A student who is admitted in SMCB, but whose admission or mental ability test results and quarterly grades show an academic deficiency. Remedial Proceeding for Students on Academic Probation Status: a. Regular follow-up b. Regular parent-teacher conference/dialogue c. Withdrawal from all co-curricular and extracurricular activities Lifting of Academic Probation Status The probation status of a student shall be lifted upon gaining a mark of at least 75 in all academic subjects. However, the Principal, in coordination with the Basic Education Academic Council (BEDAC), may maintain a student's academic probation status if s/he deems it necessary. Failures [Based on DepEd Order No. 8, s. 2015] 1. Grades 1-10. The following are important points to note regarding failures for Grades 1 to 10 students: a. Marks lower than 75% are failing b. Any student who fails in two subjects must pass intervention classes for her/him to be promoted to the next grade level. Intervention classes are conducted after the Final Grades have been computed. c. A student who fails in three or more subjects, is retained and required to repeat the grade level where s/he failed. d. Students who fail in Conduct in the final grading period may be denied admission the following year. 2. Grades 11-12. The following are important points to note regarding failures for Grades 11 to 12 students: a. Marks lower than 75% are failing b. A student who fails in a prerequisite subject in a learning area must pass remedial classes for failed competencies in the subject before being allowed to enroll in the higher-level subject. c. Any student who fails in any subject must pass remedial classes for failed competencies in the subjects to be allowed to enroll in the next semester. Otherwise, the learner must retake the subjects they failed. d. A student must pass ALL SUBJECTS in Senior High School to earn the Senior High School Diploma. e. Students who fail in Conduct in the final grading period may be denied admission the following year. Section 7 INTERVENTION AND TUTORIAL CLASSES 7.1 Intervention classes in English, Math and Science subjects are given a scheduled day / time for groups of students who are under academic probation and those who need to master the minimum learning competencies per quarter. 7.2 Students who find difficulty in coping with classroom work during the year are offered tutorial and intervention classes. Candidates for Tutorial and Intervention Program are determined by the Principal, the Academic Coordinator, Subject Area Coordinators and Subject Teachers 7.3 Summer/Headstart Classes are given to students with academic difficulties in English, Math and Science. 7.4 Tutorial services are offered from kindergarten to Grade 12. 7.5 Honor students should not be tutored. They are expected to be self-reliant learners. Tutoring will disqualify them from the honor roll. Tutorial for non-honors shall be stopped if the tutee qualifies for academic merit. 7.6 To request for tutorial service, a parent or guardian should consult the Principal to determine the need for tutorial and the availability of the prospective tutor. Upon approval, the tutor, the time and the venue for the tutorial shall be set and logged. 7.7 Once the tutorial service has been set, a tutorial form shall be accomplished by the parent/guardian; this is to be presented to the Finance Office to secure a tutorial permit after payment. 7.8 A log sheet shall be filled out every time there is a tutorial session for recording and monitoring purposes. 7.9 Tutorial sessions will be from Monday to Friday, at least 30 minutes after the last period in the afternoon. 7.10 No tutoring shall be held when teachers concerned have to attend official meetings or activities sanctioned by the school. 7.11 Should the parent/guardian wish to terminate the tutorial service, the tutor, the principal and the cashier must be properly informed. 7.12 Any feedback regarding the tutorial service and intervention classes may be coursed through the office of the principal. 7.13 Attendance to intervention classes and/or tutorial will not guarantee a passing mark in the subject/s concerned. 7.14 Attendance to intervention class (Tutorial and Remedial) does not guarantee the passing of the subject. Section 8 EXAMINATION GUIDELINES The school conducts four scheduled unit tests and periodical tests per school year. Only students who were absent on examination days with justifiable reasons due to serious illness, and emergency cases like death of immediate relatives will be given special tests upon presentation of a medical certificate and valid excuse letter or if parents have made documented arrangements prior to the test schedule. Special tests are scheduled 3 days after the original schedule of the examination. Unsettled accounts are to be paid at least 3 days before the scheduled unit test and periodical test. The students are required to submit the updated test permit to the class adviser on or before the examination day. In case of a justifiable reason, a valid promissory note may be submitted to the Finance Office through the class adviser. Schedules for the test are followed strictly. The following procedures are to be observed during the quarterly examinations: * Students come in complete uniform with their IDs * Only needed materials are brought to the examination room. These are: a. 1 clean long beige folder with plastic cover b. black ball pen c. Number 2 lead pencil, eraser and sharpener (bring extra premium) d. Other materials prescribed by the teacher prior to the examination Cheating is seriously dealt with. A student who cheats in quizzes, unit tests, projects, themes and experiments shall be given 0% grade in the component where s/he cheated. Student/s caught cheating and allowing another to cheat shall receive a zero in that particular test or graded activity. In case where a student arrives late for her/his examination: * A student who arrives late without justifiable reason will take the test, with no time extension. * A student who opts not to take her exam because s/he has arrived late may be allowed to take a make-up exam if she/he was late for a valid reason. The school reserves the right to deny the student a test if she/he presents an unsatisfactory excuse. Exemption in Examination due to Contest Winnings A student who represents the school in inter school competition/s, in academics, cultural or athletics is exempted in the unity/periodical test proceeding the date of the contest. Aside from the co-curricular points earned by the student, she/he is also given the equivalent grade in the unity/periodical test in the subject related to his/her contest winning/s: 1st place 100% 2nd place 98% 3rd place 96% 4th place 95% 5th place 94% Participation 93% Students who joined and won consecutive contests of similar or the same category will have the higher winning applied as grade for exemption. Those who joined consecutive contests of different categories will enjoy exemption in all subjects involved. If the student opts to take the examination when he/she got lower exemption points, the result of the test will be recorded. Absence incurred while the contestants are training or competing does not excuse them from accomplishing missed product or performance. However, due consideration and assistance will be given to help them catch up with missed work. Prospective contestants/athletes to represent the school in competitions should have no grade lower than 80%. Exemption in Final Examination Students may be exempted in the final examination in any subject provided that his/her average class standing from first to 4th quarter is 95%. The final examination of those who will avail of the exemption is 95%. If the student opts to take the final examination, its result will be recorded whether it is higher or lower than 95%. Section 9: GRADUATION/COMPLETION REQUIREMENTS 8.1 Graduating students/Completers are required to submit all academic requirements and settle all accounts before graduation/completion/moving up ceremonies. 8.2 Graduating students/completers with failing grades may not be allowed to join the graduation exercises/completers. 8.3 Any graduating student/Completer who is found guilty of any grave misconduct after due process may not be allowed to join the graduation exercises/completion ceremonies. Section 10: ISSUANCE OF REPORT CARDS Report Card serves as the official communication and the information of the student’s academic standing and performance in school. The report card is issued at the end of each quarter. The following guidelines are given pertaining report card issuance: 9.1 Parents are required to get their son's/daughter's card for signature and dialogue with the adviser. 9.2 In case of some unavoidable circumstances where the parent/s cannot come to school to get the report card any authorized representative may claim the document as long as s/he presents valid identification and authorization letter coming from the parent/s 9.3 At the end of the school year, a report card will be issued only to a student who has complied with all clearance requirements. Section 11: Bring Your Own Device This policy is designed to provide basic information you will need to be a responsible user of personally owned device(s) in school for the purpose of enriching your academic learning experiences by accessing the Phoenix Aralinks Learning Management System - Collaborative Learning Environment (CLE) Moreover, this document intends to promote safety in balancing usability and risks in a 'Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) scenario and ensure an atmosphere of learning. Defining BYOD Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) is a program which allows students to bring their own device to school for the. purpose of enriching their academic learning experiences. The implementation of BYOD allows students of St. Mary's College of Baliuag to: a.) accomplish graded and non-graded online exercises and activities through the Phoenix Aralinks Collaborative Learning Environment b.) have easy access to information from the Phoenix Aralinks Learning Management System c.) maximize the utilization of the Phoenix Aralinks Learning Management System for learning ana developing glife-long skills,and d.) experience more fully 21st century learning with a holistic, creative, collaborative and global perspective The ultimate success of this system is dependent upon the honor, integrity, and exercise of good judgment by each individual user. Student Agreement As a student of St. Mary's College of Baliuag, Inc., I abide by the school's BYOD policy which states that: 1. I can only bring and use 1 device to school, I will register this device for security purposes and to comply with the objectives of the BYOD Program. 2. 1will only use my device to access online exercises, quizzes, and other activities in the Phoenix Aralinks Collaborative Learning Environment. 3. I will not use the cellular functions of my device such as but not limited to texting, calling, and sending multimedia messages. 4. Without the approval or instruction of my teacher or of a school authority, I will not use my device to record (audio, video, still photos) any school proceedings, especially classroom discussions and activities. 5. 1 will only use my own Phoenix CLE log-in details provided by the Phoenix Aralinks staff and will never share these details with others. 6. I will be held responsible at all times for the proper use of my account. If I perform tasks that violate the appropriate and responsible use of the Phoenix CLE, the school administration will review reports from the Phoenix Aralinks staff and assess necessary action that needs to be taken. 7. I will not use my own device to harm or destroy any part of the Phoenix CLE. Any such harm or misuse is subject to disciplinary action that will be determined by the school administration. 8. I will not use my own device to knowingly search for, link to, access or send anything that is: (a) offensive (b) pornographic (c) threatening (d) abusive (e) defamatory (f) considered to be an act of bullying. 9. I will not use my device to violate the provisions of RA No. 9995 otherwise known as the Anti- Photo and Voyeurism Act of the Philippines 10. I will report to my teacher or Phoenix Aralinks staff any inappropriate behavior or material that I have accessed and/or which I have received from someone. 11. I understand that Phoenix CLE allows students to exchange messages with their classmates and teachers. As is with other messaging and communication platforms, I will use respectful and tactful language when conversing with classmates or teachers. 12. I understand and agree that the school can conduct random checking of devices to ensure that the use of the device abides by the regulations stated in the policy. 13. l acknowledge that the school cannot be held responsible for any damage to, or theft of my device. 14. I understand and have read the limitations of the manufacturer's warranty on my device, both in duration and in coverage. 15. I understand that non-compliance with any of these procedures, rules and regulations have corresponding sanctions. Student Responsibilities Operating System: Students make sure that their operating system and software are duly licensed and legally acquired. Battery life and charging: Student devices must be fully charged for the entire school day. No charging equipment will be supplied by the school. Back up batteries or a power bank may be brought for easy charging. Wi-Fi network connection: Student devices can only connect to the school's Wi-Fi network while accessing the Phoenix CLE. Theft and damage: Students are responsible for securing and protecting their devices at school Any loss or damage to a device is not the responsibility of the school. The device should be properly labeled with the owner's identification (Complete Name, Grade Level and Section, Student Number) Maintenance and support: Students are solely responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of their devices. Ergonomics: Students should ensure they are comfortable using their device in relation to screen size, sturdy keyboard, etc. Confiscation: Student devices may be temporarily confiscated if the school has reasonable grounds to breaches of the BYOD Student Agreement. Other considerations: Protective Casing: Tough and sturdy to avoid damage Weight: Lightweight for ease of carrying Durability: Durable and strong ARTICLE IV STUDENT ACTIVITIES The school gives emphasis on the participation of students in co-curricular activities which complement classroom instruction, develop their originality and creativity and redirect their energy to more productive activities that intensify the development of learning skills. These activities also provide venues for students to develop leadership and exhibit their innate talents and abilities widen their horizon and allow them to grow in confidence and camaraderie. Section 1 The Student Activity Program The school's Student Activity Development Program is designed for the total development of students as they engage in a wide variety of co-curricular and extracurricular activities offered throughout the school year. These activities are under the supervision of club moderators, teachers, advisers and the Student Activity Coordinator. The activities are aimed to promote and develop the psycho-spiritual, cultural, socio-civic consciousness and physical aspects of the students as well as to hone their innate talents and interests so that they may become productive, responsive, responsible, and creative leaders and members of the school, their family, and the society. These undertakings supplement the classroom activities. Students are required to join these clubs/organizations. 1.1 Policies on Student Activities The following are specific policies of Student Activities: 1. Each student (from Grade 3 to 12) is required to join an organization/club of her/his interest. 2. Club meetings are held once a week during class days. Activities and meetings done after class hours or during weekends and non-school days must be approved by the Student Activity Coordinator (StAC). Student Activity Permit (StAC-FO-014) issued by the StAC should be signed by the parents/guardian. All activities are supervised by the teacher-in-charge or club moderator. 3. Students participating in academic contests or other activities outside of the school campus must be accompanied by the StAC or a Subject Area Coordinator (SAC), a club moderator and/or a subject teacher. 1.2 Guidelines on Club Activities Each club/organization shall have a Constitution and By-Laws and an Annual Program Plan (APAP) and Activity Plan per week approved by the Student Activity Coordinator (StAC) and noted by the principal. 1. Each club shall have a moderator who is appointed by the principal upon the recommendation of the StAC. The School President approves the appointment. 2. Each club moderator must submit an Activity Plan at least three (3) days before the club meeting. 3. Club activities promote the psycho-spiritual, intellectual, cultural, social, and physical development of the students. 4. Club campaign/promotion will be held at the start of the school year. 5. No major club activity is to take place at least three (3) days before examination days 1.3 Guidelines on Officership/ Membership 1. All students are members/contributors to The Marynette, the official school paper. 2. Each student (from Grades 3 to 12) is a member of Government and a member of Student club/organization. 3. A student may apply to join three (3) clubs according to her/his interest, but s/he can only be accepted to only one (1) from the three (3) choices. The student undergoes an audition, interview or try-out to be able to join the club. 4. Regular attendance and punctuality at meetings and activities are required of all members. 5. Election of officers. The election of Student Government officers is done towards the end of the school year preceding their year of service. Election of class/club officers is done at the start of the school year. A student can only be elected or appointed to only one (1) position either in the SG or in a club/organization. 6. Student Government (SG). The SG is composed of the President, Vice-President, Secretary, Treasurer, Business Manager, Public Information Officer (PIO), Multi-media Manager, Senators (from each grade level), and Representatives (from each grade level). 7. Class Officers. Class Officers are composed of Mayor, Vice Mayor, Secretary, Treasurer, Auditor, Sergeant-at-Arms,and PIO 8. The following are the qualities for officership. The student must: * be of good moral character; * have no disciplinary record especially on the previous school year; * have great interest, dedication, and skills (related to the club); * show loyalty to the school; * possess leadership qualities and characteristics. 1.4 Club Grade Club performance shall be reflected in the report card using descriptive rating. 1. Punctuality/Attendance (30%) 2. Interest/Participation (20%) 3. Discipline/Orderliness (20%) 4. Resourcefulness/Creativity (15%) 5. Skills (15%) Total: (100%) Descriptive Ratings and their numerical equivalent: A+ 98-100 B- 83-85 A 95-97 C+ 80-82 A- 92-94 C 77-79 B+ 89-91 C 75-76 B 86-88 1.5 School Clubs /Organizations 1. STUDENT GOVERNMENT (SG). The Student Government (SG) is the highest governing student body. It is the official representative of the students on matters where its rights and responsibilities are concerned. The Student Government officers are all elected by the student body (from Grade 3 to Grade 12) except for the representatives who are elected by the voters of their respective grade level only. The SG represents the students in the policy-making body of the school concerning students' welfare. They are exposed to varied activities aimed to develop their leadership potentials, strengthen their Christian values, and raise their level of self-awareness and social consciousness. 2. THE MARYNETTE (School Paper). The Marynette is the official school's publication which expresses in print the aspirations and dreams of the student-writers in their own unique style and writing techniques. Further The Marynette disseminates news which concerns the school and community. It is published on a semestral basis in English and Filipino. Students interested in campus journalism are encouraged to submit written contributions to the said publication. 3. The MOTHER IGNACIA ORGANIZATION. The Mother Ignacia Organization comprises all students enrolled in SMCB. However activities of the said organization are facilitated by a group of officers. The organization conducts an in-depth study of the life of Mother Ignacia. The members are given the proper orientation in promoting the Cause of the Venerable Foundress for her beatification. They are encouraged to live up to the virtues and lifestyle of the Venerable Foundress either in or off campus. The club works closely with the Christian Living Area and the Campus Ministry and coordinates with all the liturgical activities conducted inside and outside the school whenever school's participation is called for 4. The CAMPUS MINISTRY CIRCLE. Through the office of Campus Ministry, the school offers our students varied programs and services that develop their deeper faith- life commitment in and outside the SMCB community. In addition to the offerings of the Christian Living curriculum in all levels, spiritual and apostolate opportunities like: Eucharistic celebrations, reach-out, retreats, recollections, confirmations confessions, and other service-oriented activities are provided. 5. RELIGIOUS CLUB. The Religious Club has only one (1) club under its category namely, The Liturgical Alliance. This club provides members the necessary training in their service for the celebration of the Holy Mass. It offers its members an opportunity to appreciate the Liturgy of the Catholic Church. The club has two (2) sub-groups: (a) Lectors and Commentators, and (b) Knights of the Altar. 6. SPECIAL INTERESTS CLUBS. * Salindayog Dance Troupe. The Dance Troupe provides opportunities for self-expression through dance and rhythmic body movements. It serves as a means to enhance self-confidence, grace, endurance and discipline. * Voces Mariae (Glee Club). The club serves and praises the Lord through gospel songs and relevant service-oriented activities. They propagate the love of music, and this is showcased in the members' various cultural performances within and outside of SMCB. * Teatro Mariae Club. The Teatro Mariae Club helps the members to enhance their spiritual, physical, mental and emotional sensitivities through effective verbal and non-verbal communication and exposure to theater arts. * Broadcasting Society. The Broadcasting Society offers opportunities for students to develop technical skills in areas such as audio recording and editing, video production, graphic design, and experience in journalism. Members also gain teamwork, communication, and time management. * Art Club. This club aims to develop the artistic talent of the students through various art activities to allow himself/herself to relate creatively and provide deepen her/his understanding and chance to appreciation of the world * Culinary Arts (High School)/ Future Chefs [GradeSchool). This club enables all members to acquire basic culinary knowledge and skills, * Drafting Club (High School). The Drafting Club straightforwardly communicates the focus of the club, which is centered around drafting, technical drawing, and design. * Young Librarians Club. This club responds to the needs of the learners' integral growth and promotes the value of reading for enjoyment and for seeking wider knowledge from varied printed materials. 7. ACADEMIC CLUBS * Computer Graphic Designers' Club (High School.) This club serves as a vehicle where young Marians develop, acquire, explore, and enhance computer knowledge and editing skills in practical application. * Chess & Sudoku (GS) and Chessmates (HighSchool). The objective of the club is to develop students' skills in chess and Sudoku. This club prepares the students for tournaments and contests. * Future Scientists' Club (GS-JHS). This club aims to develop scientific awareness through investigative activities and experimentation and to learn and apply scientific processes and methods in every activity. * I-SEEKERS' Club. This club discusses recent news stories, analyzes their significance, and explores different viewpoints on current events 8. SOCIO-CIVIC CLUBS * Eco Ambassadors. It makes the students become aware of what is happening to our Mother Earth and promotes love and protection of the environment * First Aiders' Club. This club provides the students basic skills in first aid treatment for different kinds of body injuries thereby promoting service to others. * Peer Counselors' Club. This club molds the students how to be effective in helping themselves and others with emotional issues and assist them overcome the challenges they face. 9. SPORTS AND ATHLETIC CLUBS. Sports and Athletic Clubs aim to provide students with opportunities to acquire knowledge, understanding and experience necessary to develop an appreciation of sports and its related activities. It also aims to promote the virtue of camaraderie and sportsmanship. The following are the sports and athletic clubs offered in the school: * Badminton Club (GS / HS * Phoenix Volleyball Club (GS/HS) * Basketball Club (GS/HS) * Table Tennis Club 10. SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL ACADEMIC & SOCIO-CIVIC ORGANIZATIONS * Magis Math. Magis Math helps to foster a love for mathematics and problem solving, teaches new problem-solving techniques and helps students gain mathematical insight and enhance critical thinking. * PhysOlimpians/FORCES. The club aims at enhancing one's sense of awareness, creativeness, and inventiveness. Furthermore, it is established to provide more information, opportunities and occasions for students to pursue and widen their interest in science in an informal situation. * Face Artistry Club. This club is a Senior High School club that encourages its members to practice the proper social decorum and graces along with proper grooming, hygiene, fitness and styling for future young professionals. Basics on cosmetology, nail art, hair culture and fashion will also be included in the roster of activities. It provides the Ignacian Marian perspective in the rapid and ever changing fashion, trends and styles to redirect and improve their sense of decorum and style in social situations in order to prepare them for a better future. 11. SMCB VARSITY. Aspiring players are required to join in the try-out activity provided by the coach/moderator of the following sports activities: * Badminton * Volleyball * Basketball * Table Tennis * Swimming * Taekwondo * Chess A student will be allowed to be a member of the varsity team provided that s/he meets the following requirements: * Conduct grade not lower than 85. * No grades below 80 % in all subjects at any quarter * No disciplinary case 1. OTHER STUDENT ACTIVITY OFFERINGS * Academic and Cultural Week * Educational Field Trips/ Lakbay -Aral * Speakers' Bureau * Empowerment Week * Intramurals * Field Demonstration (Foundation Day) * Reach-out Activities ARTICLE V GENERAL POLICIES It is the school's utmost desire to develop and educate its students to become fully integrated persons who are God-loving, humane, Filipino Ignacian Marian for others, Thus, the following set of rules aims to discourage or prevent misconduct and to inculcate the school's educational effort rather than impose punishment or penalty. This will help students develop self-discipline and become responsible individuals. When students enter SMCB, it is presumed that their purpose is earnest and that their effort and conduct will bear out this presumption. If, however, they showed evidence of unbecoming behavior, or should neglect their scholastic duties, the school will take specific action as it deems appropriate. Students who fail to make proper use of the opportunities given to them may expect to have their privileges curtailed or withdrawn. Each student is responsible for acquainting himself/herself with all regulations regarding attendance, conduct, academic requirements and other matters as contained in the Student-Parent Handbook and s/he is expected to abide by the same. Any regulation adopted by the Administration of the school shall have the same force as a printed regulation in the Student Handbook. Section 1: ROUTINE PROCEDURES AND POLICIES 1.1 SCHOOL UNIFORM. All Students should be in complete uniform with the ID worn properly inside the campus during class days, unless exempted by the Prefect of Discipline. a. Daily Uniform for Girls Daily Uniform for Girls (Pre- school) a. BLOUSE Collar :Peter Pan Sleeves :Tailored, Short Fastener : Snaps white button Cloth :Tetoron Color :White Ribbon : Royal Blue b. JUMPER Cloth: Royal Blue Straight Cut with Pleats in the middle Length: Below the knee b. Daily Uniform for Girls (Grades 1-6) BLOUSE Collar : Peter Pan Sleeves : Tailored, Short Cloth :Tetoron Color : White Ribbon : Royal Blue c. Daily Uniform for Girls (Grades 7-10/Junior High School) BLOUSE Collar: Peter Pan Sleeves: Tailored, long w/cuff Cloth: Tetoron (white) Ribbon: Royal Blue d. JUMPER: (Grade School/ High School) PLEATED SKIRT Note: 6 box pleats (4 inches wide for the center) Placket-zipper fastener at the back Belt : 1 1/2 inches wide Cloth : water repellant (Royal Blue) Length :3 inches below the knee e. Daily Uniform for Boys Preschool, Grades 1 & 2 * Dark blue shorts * White short sleeved polo with * school patch * White sando * Black shoes and white socks Grades 3-10 * Straight-Cut Dark blue pants * White short sleeved polo with school patch * White sando * Black leather shoes and white socks f. Daily Uniform for Boys and Girls (Senior High School) g. Gala Uniform for Girls (Grades 3- 10) * Long-sleeved whole dress of white tetoron cloth with Peter Pan collar, blue ribbon and a plain belt. The skirt should be pleated. * Sampaguita lace decorates the front bodice, edges of collar and cuff of sleeves. * Black leather shoes and socks CLOTH: White Tetoron LACE: Sampaguita lace No. of PLEATS:16 one-way pleats BUTTONS:9 white small buttons No. of PIN TUCKS: 6 each side LENGTH: 3 inches below the knee * Gala Uniform for Boys (Grades 3-10) CLOTH : Santana COLLAR : Sports Collar BARONG: Long-sleeved White Polo PANTS : Straight-Cut Dark Blue SHOES : Black leather Note: The gala uniform is worn during First Friday Masses and feast days that the school celebrates Always wear a white chemise when you wear the gala uniform h. PE UNIFORM (Boys and Girls) All pupils and students are required to wear the proper PE uniform during PE class. These consist of color-coded T-shirt with SMCB logo: * Junior Kinder - light pink * Senior Kinder -purple * Grade 1-mother of pink * Grade 2-light yellow * Grade 3 - apple green * Grade 4-mint green * Grade 5 - melon orange * Grade 6-sky blue * Grade 7- blue green * Grade 8- coral pink * Grade 9-corn yellow * Grade 10- royal blue with white design * Grade 11 - white shirt with royal blue design * Grade 12 - white shirt with PE logo Shorts or Jogging Pants: * SMCB Shorts (JK to Grade 2) * SMCB jogging pants (Grade 3 to 12) * White rubber shoes (Preschool to Grade 10) * Senior High- rubber shoes any color but not neon * White socks Note: The school has the right to ask the students to remodel or change any uniform that does not conform to the prescribed cut. 1.2 GOOD GROOMING. Students should come to school well-groomed. The following are strictly prescribed by the school: 1. neatly trimmed and unpolished fingernails 2. proper haircut without hair dye 3. non-wearing of the following: * Makeup (lipstick, foundation, eye shadow, eye liner, etc.) * colored contact lens * fashion accessories / jewelry HAIRCUT. Part of decent dressing is the haircut. Students are required to observe the following: * For kinder to Grade 10 boys, Barber's Cut is the only haircut allowed. The maximum tolerable haircut is approximately 2x3 above the ears and one inch above the collar * Mohawk, Undercut, Mushroom hairstyle, skin- head or semi-bald or any trendy hairstyles are NOT ALLOWED. * Males are not allowed to have facial hair (beard or mustache). * Senior High School boys should always observe clean cut hairstyle * Bangs should be at or above eyebrow level for the girls and /or neatly brushed away from the face. Note: Checking of hair is every First Monday of the month by the adviser and every First Tuesday by the POD. Students with improper haircuts will be sanctioned accordingly. 1.3 SCHOOL IDENTIFICATION CARD 1. The school ID card should be worn upon entry in the school gate and displayed at all times on campus and during school-sanctioned days or off-campus activities. Students without an ID card should secure a temporary ID from the Office of the Prefect of Discipline which is valid only for one day. 2. In case of loss, the student should secure ID card by following the procedures: * Fill out the application form from the office of the * Registrar signed by parents/guardians. * Pav ID card fee at the Cashier's office. * Present the receipt and claim the ID card from the Registrar's office. 3. IDs should be kept free from trimmings (stickers, drawings) or tampering 4. The ID card is non-transferable. Swapping or lending ID cards to other students is strictly prohibited. Any misuse, alterations or fabrication of the card will subject the holder to disciplinary action by the school. 5. The school I issued to all students is good for 1 (one) school year only. 6. ID cards will be issued under the student's assigned number. An ID card may be changed for valid reasons only (e.g. wrongly spelled name, or wrong information). Section 2: ATTENDANCE 2.1 Absences * Regular attendance and punctuality are required to all Ignacian Marians. A student who has been absent from class is readmitted upon presentation of a formal excuse letter signed by parent or guardian to the Prefect of Discipline. The adviser must see to it that this is done first thing in the morning/afternoon * * Students who are absent in the morning should be in school before the first period in the afternoon If a student has incurred three (3) O more consecutive absences,s/he is admitted to class only if accompanied by her parents or guardian. A medical certificate duly signed by the attending physician must be presented to the Prefect of Discipline (POD), An admission slip is issued to the student which will be presented to her/his adviser or subject teacher * * Letters duly prepared and signed by the parent or guardian shall be honored, Letters written by students, even if signed by the parents, will not be honored * * Absences do not excuse a student from missed homework, lessons, or class work like performance tasks, projects, experiments, book reports, term paper,or any other school requirement. However, quizzes missed due to prolonged sickness will not be computed * against the absent student. * * Following the DepEd policy, every student is required to attend classes not less than 80% of the total number of school days. However, if the absence was due to a medical condition or any other permissible reason, the school head may give the student a chance to fulfill her/his academic requirements. * * Truancy is a serious offense that requires the presence of a parent before a student is readmitted to class. A truant student will be given 70% in conduct and shall be placed under disciplinary probation 2.2 Excused Absences. An absence caused by illness, death in the family, school-sponsored activities, religious holidays, appointment with the doctor, legal court appointments (signed note from the courts required) are some examples of excused student absences. Other reasons beyond these are considered unexcused. 2.3 Pre-Planned Absence. Under rare circumstances, the school may grant permission for a short or extended absence. Pre-planned absences must be arranged with the Principal. A letter from the parents/guardians must include the reasons and duration for the absence. Applicants to pre-planned absence will be held responsible for her/his missed lessons, assignments, projects, and other school requirements Section 3 NEW GUIDELINES ON THE CANCELLATION OR SUSPENSION OF CLASSES AND WORK IN SCHOOLS Source: DepEd Order No, 37,s. 2022 1. Typhoon In-person and online classes in all levels are automatically cancelled in schools situated in Local Government Units (LGUS) issued with Tropical Cyclone Wind Signals (TCWS) 1, 2, 3 ,4 or 5 by the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical, and Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA). If the TCWS is issued at a time when classes have already begun the school shall immediately suspend the classes and work and send everyone home, if it is safe to do so. However, schools are obligated to keep the students and personnel safely in school if travelling has become unsafe. Local Chief Executives shall decide on the cancellation or suspension of classes in cases where there are strong winds in specific or all areas of the LGU but is not due to a typhoon 2. Heavy Rainfall In-person and online classes in all levels are automatically cancelled in schools situated in LGUs issued with Yellow, Orange and Red Rainfall Warning by the PAGASA. If the Warning is issued at a time when classes have already begun the school shall immediately suspend the classes and work and send everyone home, if it is safe to do so. However, schools are obligated to keep the students and personnel safely in school if travelling has become unsafe. Local Chief Executives shall decide on the cancellation/suspension of classes in cases where there are torrential rains in specific or all areas of the LGU but are not issued a Heavy Rainfall Alert by PAGASA. 3. Flood In-person and online classes in all levels are automatically cancelled in schools situated in LGUS issued with a Flood Warning by the PAGASA. If the Flood Warning is issued at time when classes have already begun, the school shall immediately suspend the classes and work and send everyone home, if it is safe to do so. However, schools are obligated to keep the students and personnel safely in school if travelling has become unsafe. Local Chief Executives shall decide on the cancellation or suspension of classes in cases where there is flooding in specific or all areas of the LGU but is not issued a Flood Warning by PAGASA. 4. Earthquakes In-person and online classes in all levels are automatically cancelled in schools situated in LGUs where the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology (PHILVOCS) declare an earthquake with PHILVOCS Earthquake Intensity Scale (PEIS) V or above. Local Chief Executives shall decide on the cancellation or suspension of classes in cases where the PEIS is IV and below. School Principals can cancel classes at any Intensity Scale if in their assessment, buildings and other structures are seen to be in danger of collapsing or are found to have major damage. The School Disaster Risk Reduction and Management (DRRM) Team Head should clear the return of students and personnel in buildings and other structures Section 4: TARDINESS 4.1 The First Bell is at 7:00 AM and the Final Bellis at exactly 7:10 AM which signals the start of the morning ceremony. A student who enters the campus after the final bell is considered late. S/he cannot enter the classroom without securing a tardy slip from the Office of the POD. 4.2 Sanctions for Accumulated Tardiness First 3 Tardiness: * Conference with student and parents/guardians and class adviser * Oral Warning with written promise (to be recorded in IBR) * Issuance of case slip * Written Promise Second 3 Tardiness: * Conference with student and parents/guardians and class adviser * 1st Violation Report Third 3 Tardiness: * Conference with student and parents/guardians and class adviser * 2nd Violation Report * Community Service for 1 day and 70 % in character in CL/RS Fourth 3 Tardiness: * Conference with student and parents/guardians and class adviser * 3'd Violation Report * Community Service for two days and 70 % in character in CL/RS Note: Community service is in the form of clerical work rendered by a student in offices like the Office of the POD, CIP Coordinator Health Services Unit, Instructional Media Center (IMC), and Guidance This will be for the duration of the suspension 4.3 A student who has accumulated two (2) cases of tardiness in any class after the following: recess, lunch break, P.E.,Computer, TLE, and classes in the laboratories, shall be given an oral reprimand. Subsequent violations will warrant an issuance of a case slip. Note: Absences and tardiness are considered excused if the reason for her/his absence is sickness or death of an immediate family member. Tardiness is considered excused if the reason given is beyond the student's control (ex. flat tire, engine trouble, accident). Section 5: PASSES 5.1 Exit Pass. An Exit Pass is issued to a student who has to leave the school due to emergency or valid reason (e.g., appointment with a doctor, dentist, counselor, or lawyer, court appearance, and funeral of a member of the immediate family). The parent/guardian should secure and accomplish a gate pass signed by the POD and with the approval of the principal. The student will be allowed to leave the school only if s/he is fetched by her/his parent or guardian. When a student needs an early dismissal, parents must: 1. Prepare a written request for the early dismissal. A parent/guardian should appear in person to request an early dismissal from the principal; however, the school reserves the right to ask for proper identification 2. Write a note explaining the absence and have their son or daughter bring it to the Prefect of Discipline when s/he returns to school. 5.2 Gate Pass. A Gate Pass is issued only to students who live within the school vicinity. This is issued upon the request of a parent or a guardian. Abuse of the use of a gate pass (e.g. taking lunch in eateries/ fastfood centers, lending of gate pass, unexcused tardiness or absence in the afternoon and the like shall be sanctioned accordingly.) Section 6 SLIPS 6.1 Admission Slip. An Admission Slip is issued by the POD to a student who was absent after submitting a written explanation signed bv the guardian or parent. 6.2 Tardy Slip. A Tardy Slip is issued by the POD to a student who came to school late. A student needs to explain verbally or in writing the reason/s of her/his tardiness. 6.3 Clinic Slip. A Clinic Slip is issued to a student who is indisposed and needs to go to the clinic during class hours. Students should follow the procedure in going to the clinic. * Inform the teacher so that the beadle will note down her/his name on the attendance sheet * Secure and fill out a slip provided by the clinic. * Present the clinic slip to the subject teacher/adviser/beadle for record upon returning to the classroom * If advised to go home, the school nurse in coordination with the Prefect of Discipline informs the parent or guardian of the student and issues the exit permit which shall be surrendered to the security officer upon exit. 6.4 Case Slip. A Case Slip is issued by the Prefect of Discipline to a student who has committed any minor or major offense. 6.5 Call Slip. A Call Slip may be issued by the Principal, the POD and/or the Guidance Counselor to students for important matters. In case a student is having an examination, s/he may not be called out of the class. Section 7: SCHOOL CURFEW The curfew time in the classroom is 30 minutes after the dismissal period. IBED students may stay on the school Bounds at 5:00 pm only. If they need to stay beyond the curfew time they should have a permit duly signed by the Teacher-in-Charge of the activity the Student Activity Coordinator In special cases the prit must give her/his approval of the request to stay beyond the New Hour. Saturday practices or collaborative work on projects are allowed provided that necessary permission slips are duly accomplished, and the presence of the teacher in-charge is ensured. Practices, group activities and the like held outside school are NOT sanctioned or authorized by the school. Section 8: LUNCH BREAK 8.1 Only students with valid Gate Pass will be allowed to leave the campus during lunch break. 8.2 Students are not allowed to stay inside the classroom during lunch break, however, they must be in their respective classroom at least 10 minutes before the first period to prepare for the afternoon classes. Section 9: LOCKERS Students are required to provide their padlock for the locker assigned to them. With this, they take responsibility over all their personal belongings kept inside the lockers. A name tag must be inserted in its proper place to identify the user. However, students are not allowed to put other label or stickers and posters to be pasted in the locker Section 10: ANNOUNCEMENTS AND NOTICES Important and urgent announcements and notices are posted on designated bulletin boards. Everybody must READ all notices and announcements for proper dissemination and observance of pertinent matters affecting the school and its operation Section 11: LOST AND FOUND ARTICLES All lost and found articles must be reported and turned over to the POD. T claim, the owners must be able to identify their lost articles properly before they can claim it. ARTICLE VI POLICIES and RULES ON DISCIPLINE During school days, the school is responsible for the students’ whereabouts. Therefore, all students are forbidden to leave the campus from the time they arrive until the last class in the afternoon. Students are expected to show respect and courtesy all the time in all areas of the school. Section 1 PROPER BEHAVIOR 1.1. In the Classroom and Corridors a. Silence is expected during prayer. Students stop, show reverence by assuming the prayer position during Morning Prayer, Angelus and Three o'clock Habit. Silence and active participation during masses are highly expected among all students. b. Students should stand at attention and participate properly during morning ceremonies and assemblies. c. Students must maintain cleanliness and orderliness inside and outside of the classroom and along the corridors at all times. d. Class disturbances such as dragging of feet, howling, shouting, laughing boisterously, yelling, stamping, whistling, running, horse playing, and other unnecessary noise should be avoided. e. The "KEEP RIGHT RULE" should be observed in passing along the corridors and stairways. f. Students are not allowed to go out after each subject. However, permission to leave may be asked first from the next period teacher. Going out with a class pass after seeking permission is done ONE AT A TIME and logging out and in is required. g. Students who leave the classroom during class hours without permission from the subject teacher are considered to be cutting classes. h. Students should be out of the classroom at the set curfew time. i. Each class should have a locator for information on their whereabouts. j. Lights and electric fans are to be turned off and doors are kept closed whenever the class leaves the room. k. Clubs who make use of classrooms during activity periods are responsible for keeping and maintaining the cleanliness of the room. l. Students are not allowed to stay in classrooms not assigned to them any time of the day. Students should observe proper zoning intended for their grade level assigned. m. Parent-Teacher Conferences are done on an appointment basis. For student discipline purposes, the office of the Prefect of Discipline is made available. The office of the Academic Coordinator is open for parent-teacher conferences involving academic matters and the office of the Principal for other instructional concerns. 1.2 In the Campus a. School property should be used with care. Any damage resulting from negligence and carelessness is paid for by the student concerned. b. Any print materials for posting need to be approved and signed by the Student Activity Coordinator (STAC). Violation of this rule means confiscation of said materials. c. The school assumes no responsibility for lost articles. d. The Faculty Room is exclusive for faculty members. Students may see their teacher or may have a conference with them in the Conference Room. e. Students are expected to support and take part in the "Environmental Management Activities" such as Clean As You Go (CLAYGO), The Plastic Solution (TPS), single-use plastic ban, waste segregation inside the classroom and the campus, Palit Basura project, "bring your own eating utensils and tumbler drive", etc. 1.3 In the Chapel a. Disrespectful behaviors/actions are prohibited inside the chapel. b. Students should not desecrate the tabernacle and any religious images or icons. c. Going to the chapel to while away the time, relax or chat with friends is prohibited. 1.4 Canteen House Rules a. Observe proper line formation when buying meals at the food counter. No jumping in line will be done; everyone must wait for her/his turn. b. "CLEAN AS YOU GO" (CLAYGO) policy: Students are to clean up the table they used before leaving, putting used dishes in their proper place and throwing wrappers in the trash can. Proper waste and eating utensils segregation must be observed. c. Vandalism and other acts meant to cause damage to the utensils, fixtures, and anything in the canteen and its premises will be sanctioned. d. Everyone is encouraged to bring their own eating utensils (lunchbox, spoon and fork), tumblers, and eco bag to observe personal eating hygiene and to help reduce garbage, thus promoting care for the environment. Repeated nonconformance to the EMS policy may be met with environmental service like assistance in garbage segregation in the canteen, "pulot basura" task, recite a pledge for the environment or create an enviroquote for posting. Article VII OFFENSES AND PENALTIES Certain acts or omissions are prohibited because consequences may adversely affect the interest of the school, its personnel, and students. These are the acts categorized according to their gravity with their corresponding consequences. Each private school shall have the authority and prerogative to promulgate such reasonable norms, rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for the maintenance of good discipline, which shall be effective as of the date of promulgation, unless, otherwise specified... Chapter IV, K, Title Ill (Student Discipline) Section 132 (Authority to Promulgate School Rules) "Compendium of Education Legislation for Private Basic Education.") Sarmiento, 2011, p.640. Section 1: OFFENSES under CATEGORY A (O.C.A.) First Offense: Oral Warning (to be recorded in the Individual Behavior Record-IBR) Second Offense: 1st Violation Report (VR) Third Offense: 2nd Violation Report with written promise Fourth Offense: 3rd Violation Report and 1 day suspension Fifth Offense: 4th Violation Report and 2-day suspension 1. Entering the classroom without admission / tardy slip when late or absent. 2. Habitual tardiness (which includes after recess, lunch break and between periods) and absences. 3. Failure to bring and present an excuse letter after being absent from the class. 4. For girls: improper wearing of daily and gala uniforms. * Incorrect cut/style of uniform (hipster and blousy) * Folded or rolled sleeves * Wearing of non-black and non-leather shoes * Wearing of clog high-heeled shoes * Wearing of dangling/big earrings, multiple earrings and excessive jewelry * No ID * Non-wearing of belt, ribbon and the prescribed socks * Wearing of make-up and nail polish * Extremely short hair * Colored hair 5. For boys: improper wearing of daily and gala uniforms. * Wearing of polo without patches * Incorrect cut/style of slacks * Wearing of non-black and non-leather shoes * Wearing of earrings, multiple earrings, wrist band knitted bracelet, necklace and excessive jewelry * No ID * Non-wearing of plain white sleeveless undershirt * Sporting skinhead haircut or semi bald * Non-wearing of white socks * faddish style * Colored hair 6. Improper wearing of PE/Club uniform * Incorrect cut/style of jogging pants * No ID * Non-wearing of white socks * Non-wearing of colored PE/Club shirt assigned to their grade level * Non-wearing of white rubber shoes (K-10) 1. Use of nail polish, maintaining long nails, sporting dyed hair and plucked/shaved eyebrows 2. Non-observance of the dress code during the wearing of civilian clothes 3. Improper manner of sitting anywhere in/or outside the campus while in uniform (sitting with feet up or knees wide apart, sitting on teacher's table, laboratory tables, dining tables, staircase, handrail, and ledge) 4. Non-wearing of gala uniform on special school occasions 5. Unauthorized haircut (e.g. extremely short hair for girls, faddish style for boys) 6. Going out of the classroom without a class pass 7. Failure to secure temporary ID card from the office of the Prefect of Discipline 8. Chewing gum 9. Sleeping in class 10. Room hopping 11. Curfew violation 12. Transferring seats without permission from the subject teacher 13. Non-observance of CLAYGO, littering in the canteen and corridor 14. Staying inside the classroom, comfort room and library, etc. during the morning ceremony 15. Non-observance of deadlines for submission of reply slips, contracts, violation report and other official communication 16. Other similar offenses Note: For students who have incurred three (3) repeated Minor Offenses, they will receive the following conduct grades in Christian Living: First three minor Offenses : 79% Second three minor Offenses : 78% Third three minor Offenses : 77% Section 2: OFFENSES under CATEGORY B (O.C.B.) First Offense : Oral warning with written promise (to be recorded in the IBR) Second Offense: Violation Report Third Offense: 1 day suspension & 70% character grade in CL Fourth Offense : 2 day suspension & 70% character grade in CL Fifth Offense : 3 day suspension &, 70% in character grade in CL 1. Public display of affection (e.., holding hands, kissing, hugging, and the like) with opposite/same sex (inappropriate behavior unbecoming of an Ignacian Marian student) 2. Going to the malls, movie houses and other functions outside the school campus wearing the school uniform without the company of parents/guardians 3. Absenteeism and habitual tardiness (after morning ceremony) 4. Disrupting classes and other school functions 5. Using profane and indecent words, expressions and/or actions 6.Shouting/yelling, running and boisterous laughing and any other unruly behaviour in the classrooms, along the corridors or anywhere in the campus during class hours and break time 7. Habitual curfew violation 8. Switching, lending or borrowing of IDs, gate pass, P.E. uniform, library borrower's card and other materials needed in a particular subject 9. Unauthorized and/ or excessive use of mobile phone, video camera, smart watches, and other gadgets without a written permission from school authorities 10. Violation of the (Bring Your Own Device) BYOD policy of the school 11. Inattentive and unruly behavior during Mass, activities, and other assemblies 12. Anti-ecology practices such as littering, improper disposal/segregation of garbage; uprooting of plants and trees; wasting of water, electricity, and food 13. Loitering during class hours. 14. Copying an assignment / project or allowing classmates to copy one's assignment/project. 15. Entering the faculty rooms and other restricted areas 16. Possession, distribution, borrowing magazines, opening/downloading pornographic sites from the internet indecent and other computer system files 17. Posting, liking commenting on Or sharing of indecent lending prohibited words/ pictures in social media. 18. Bringing to school prohibited items such as cigarettes or vape, liquor like wines and beers 19. Unauthorized use of LED TV in the classroom, materials, or other school equipment 20. Disrespect to a teacher such as impolite manner of answering or making faces, posting of teacher's funny/candid pictures in social media without permission, and other similar acts 21.Any similar offense committed by a student inside or outside the school campus Note: The school has jurisdiction over students even outside the school campus. In cases where their misconduct involves her/his status as a student or affects the good name or reputation of the school Compendium of Education Legislation for Private Basic Education, Section 131, page 636.) All offenses and good deeds are recorded in the logbook by the Adviser / Subject Teachers Section 3 OFFENSES under CATEGORY C (O.C.C.) First Offense: One (1) day Suspension, 70% in Character Grade in Christian Living and will be put under Disciplinary Probation (DP) Second Offense: Two (2) day Suspension, 70% in Character Grade in Christian Living and will be put under Strict Disciplinary Probation (SDP) Third Offense: Exclusion, 70% in Character and Conduct 1. Non-attendance to retreats, recollections and other similar functions without valid reason (sicknes, death) 2. Cutting classes 3. Truancy. Missing classes and staying elsewhere outside the campus while in school uniform 4. Fighting even if no physical injury is caused or inflicting injury upon any member of the school community, visitors or guests 5. Giving false testimony or statement during school investigations 6. Grave bullying such as aggressive physical contact or making threats, teasing or insulting comments (verbal bullying). This includes cyber and text bullying 7. Damaging of books or any library materials 8. Minor vandalism (intentionally destroying the property of the school or another person in any form) erasing and tampering announcements and notices 9. Any other conduct which endangers the good name of the school and its members such as taking, circulating, and publishing derogatory pictures, videos, malicious or libelous information, including publishing pictures without the consent or permission of the person concerned 10. Activating the fire alarm during class or non-class hours causing general disruption of classes and confusion to everybody inside and outside of the school campus 11. Disrespect or disobedience to any member of the administration faculty, staff, maintenance and security personnel or anybody in authority 12. Extortion. Forced collection of money, food and things for personal purpose 13. Cheating in any form, intentional or unintentional use of cheat codes copying, allowing someone to copy looking at a seatmate's paper, talking Without permission during test or quiz, submitting the Work of someone else's cheating project, texting of answers altering of scores/answers, asking or giving leaked test paper, and other similar acts of activity. The students caught cheating and allowing another to cheat shall receive a zero in that particular test or graded activity 14. Smoking cigarettes/vape inside or outside of the campus 15. Gambling in any form inside and Outside the school premises 16. Bringing in and/or drinking alcoholic beverages inside or outside the school campus 17. Inflicting or attempting to cause injury to self and other students. 18. Falsification of school's official documents 19. Falsification, forging or tampering of school records and documents. including one's ID as Well as signatures of one's parents/ guardians, teachers, and other forging the school officials 20. Unauthorized use of other names in filling out school records and documents 21. Unauthorized use of the name of the school or any school officials, teachers, and personnel to solicit donations, funds, or sponsorship to any activity such as parties, balls, dances, and other similar activities 22. Unauthorized leaving or going out of the school without exit pass 23. Threatening, intimidating, provoking or coercing any member of the school community 24. Breaking in or trespassing into the school premises 25. Participation in contests and competitions (beauty pageant, dance, show bands, movies, advertisements modeling, and the like) without a written permit and clearance from the school 26. Other similar offenses Section 4 OFFENSES under CATEGORY (O.C.D.) First Offense: Exclusion, 70% in character and Conduct No Certificate of Good Moral Character 1.Theft, stealing, malversation of class or school fund, cheating in personal dealings with other members of the school community, not returning found articles, and other forms of dishonesty 2. Membership in any fraternity or sorority or affiliation with organization whose aims are contrary to the vision, mission and goals/objectives and values of an Ignacian Marian 3. Hazing and involvement in initiation activities 4. Immorality such as engaging in premarital sex and getting pregnant or getting someone pregnant (for boys) out of wedlock, posting/and or uploading indecent pictures or “selfies” in social networks, sexting or any indecent immoral act unbecoming of a student studying in a Catholic school belongs to this category. 5. Possession and/or use of deadly and/or dangerous weapons (including knife, tear gas and the like) and pyrotechnic exposures inside the campus 6. Possessing, taking, and pushing dangerous drugs (Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002 Art. II| Sec. 26. Authorized Drug Testing). 7.Throwing flammable materials or liquid, matches into trash bins or waste boxes or any fire- hazard places in the school. 8. Bribery and/or extortion 9. Continued disregard of school's rules and regulations despite warnings and conferences 10. Major vandalism causing serious destruction to school property 11. Gross disrespect, disobedience, defiance, assault, Or abusive behavior toward school authorities, including refusal or failure to submit to safety requirements such as search and seizure procedures 12. Instigating, leading or participating in concerted activities leading to stoppage of classes 13. Proselytizing against Catholic teachings 14. Coming to school and other related activities under the influence of liquor, wine or prohibited drugs 15. Malicious mischief 16. Indecent acts such as petting, necking and other acts of any intoxicating drinks or lasciviousness 17. Grave misconduct involving a student's status as an SMCB student or affecting the good name and reputation of the school 18. Desecration of the Chapel and/or anything generally considered as sacred 19. Commission of crime and offenses punishable by law against any person affecting the student and school personnel 20. Any offense similar to any of the foregoing whether committed inside or outside the school campus where the offender is clearly identified as bonafide student of the school Important Notes: The list/classification of offenses appearing here is not all inclusive. Therefore, students may be meted with disciplinary actions for offenses other than those listed herein above or under subsequent amendment or modification of this handbook. Likewise, the school reserves the right to impose lighter or stiffer penalties for offenses depending on the attending circumstances of the case Graduating students who have been referred to the principal for conference with parents/guardians for very serious and extreme disciplinary actions (offenses under category C and D) shall NOT be allowed to join the graduation or moving up ceremonies even if they obtained passing marks in their subjects. On Data Privacy Act: "In order to discourage unlawful or immoral conduct, the data subject understands that the school has installed CCTV cameras in certain areas of the school. Any unlawful or immoral conduct captured by the school's CCTV camera is conduct made without a legitimate expectation of privacy on the part of the data subject shall be at the free use and disposal of the school for internal purposes and may be disclosed as required to assist law enforcement agencies or in court proceedings, whether or not upon the instance of the government, when mandated through appropriate legal process." Section 5 TYPES OF DISCIPLINARY ACTION 1. Oral Warning (OW). Oral Warning is a verbal warning or reprimand to the student for violation of minor offenses from the adviser/POD/any administrative officer 2. Violation Report (VR). A Violation Report is a written violation record of a student that is issued or given to the parents/guardians who in turn should sign and return it to the POD within three days after receipt of the report 3. Suspension. There are two types of suspensions-punitive and preventive. 3.1 Punitive Suspension (PS) refers to the school's prevention of a student from attending class or joining any school related activity The suspended student still comes to school but reports to the POD for community service. A suspended student is not excused from graded work like quizzes; therefore she/he shall be given a failing mark for not having taken these neither will she/he be given special quizzes to make up for these later. 3.2 Preventive Suspension A student under investigation of a case involving the penalty of expulsion may be preventively suspended from entering the school premises if the evidence of guilt is strong and the School Head is morally convinced that the continued stay of said student during the period of investigation constitutes a distraction to the normal operation of the school or poses a risk danger in the life or persons and property in the school Important Note: In all cases of suspension, a written promise of future exemplary conduct signed by the student and countersigned by her/his parents/guardian shall be required as a condition for readmission and must be required in the case of suspension for more than three days. A student who has been suspended for the third time within the school year shall be given a conduct grade of 70% for the quarter. 3.3 Disciplinary Probation (DP) is a restraining measure imposed for one calendar year on a student who has been found guilty of consistent misbehavior or a single breach of conduct. It is primarily meant to help the student develop self-discipline and improve her/his future conduct 3.3.1 Conditions for Disciplinary Probation (DP) 1. A student who receives a conduct grade of 70% or below in any of the succeeding quarters should be placed on SDP. 2. Students on DP shall not be allowed to participate in contests and sports events unless permitted by the Discipline Committee 3. The DP status will be lifted if the student obtains a conduct grade of 80% or higher for each of the four consecutive quarters 3.3.2 Conditions for Strict Disciplinary Probation 1. a student shall be excluded from the school list if she/he receives a conduct grade of 65% in the succeeding quarters 2. She/he shall not be allowed to participate in contests and sports events and less permitted by the prefect of discipline 3. the SDP status may be reduced to DP if the students obtain a conduct of 80% or higher for each of the four consecutive quarters 4. Exclusion. Is a penalty involving the removal of an undesirable student from the schools list of enrollment 5. Expulsion. Is an extreme administrative sanction debarring an offending student from all public or private schools in the Philippines. It is the most severe penalty available to schools and may not be imposed without the approval of the Secretary of the Department of Education (DepEd) (See DECS Manual of regulation for Private school article IX, Sec. 145 page 37) Section 6 PROCEDURES FOR DISCIPLINARY ACTION The following procedures are strictly observed to effectively implement and enforce the code of discipline : 1. No sanctions or penalty shall be imposed on any student until after her or his parents have been informed. Every student has the right to due process which consists of: 1.1The right to be in front of the nature or causes of the accusation against her or him 1.2 the right to answer the accusation against her or him 1.3 the right to confront her or his accuser and adverse witnesses 1.4 the right to present her or his own pieces of evidence 1.5 the right to a fair investigation 2. all offenses committed under category C and D must be reported in writing and signed by the teacher concerned 3. The student is called by the prefect of discipline to establish reasons for the alleged misconduct. The student is made aware of the violation she or he committed 4. Investigation on the case will be conducted by the prefect of discipline after which she or he will prepare the written account of the investigation and invite the parents for a conference 5. Together with the discipline committee, the POD will deliberate on the case and decide on the best possible action. The discipline committee includes the principal, academic coordinators, POD, subject area coordinators, and the adviser, subject teacher especially the cl/esp or rs teacher 6. The decision or recommendation of the committee will be endorsed by the pod to the principal for finalization. The principal relays this to the President. Peculiar or sensitive cases may be referred to the schools legal council when needed 7. The POD Calls for the parents and the corresponding sanction is presented to them 8. An agreement letter or a contract is signed by the parents/guardian,student concerned,class adviser, perfect of discipline, principal and president ST. MARY’S COLLEGE OF BALIUAG is a CATHOLIC SCHOOL. The school is an instrumentality of the religious of the Virgin Mary, a catholic institution. As such, its goals are to provide an educational program and environment animated by catholic religious beliefs, traditions, teachings and doctrine, the exercise of which is protected by, among others article III, section 5 of the 1987 Philippine constitution. Its aim is to promote within its community of students and personal values that are catholic in orientation. Immorality Refers to acts that are contrary to catholic morals teachings and values as defined described and/or discussed in the catechism of the catholic church including but not limited to fornication, pornography, prostitution, engaging in premarital sexual relations, rape, homosexuality, adultery, incest, sexual abuse, free union, trial marriages as provided in discuss in sections 235359. 2370-81, 2388-91 of the catechism of the catholic church which by references made integral to this Handbook. immorality is considered a grave offense sanctionable by dismissal. Section 7 POLICIES, RULES AND REGULATIONS ON CHILD PROTECTION, ANTI-BULLYING, and ANTI SEXUAL HARASSMENT ACT ST MARY’S COLLEGE OF BALIUAG is committed to provide a caring friendly safe and healthy learning environment accordingly the school has a zero tolerance policy for bullying and sexual harassment that it fringes the safety and health of any student. All member of the school community which includes the teachers support services personnels parents guardian students and all other community members collaboratively work to make the school a happy and secured place . The school supports the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) which aims to protect children from all forms of critical or mental violence injury and abuse neglect or negligent treatment maltreatment and exploitation including sexual abuse. It is likewise mandated by CRC that all appropriate measures be undertaken to ensure that school discipline is administered in a manner consistent with the child's human dignity and in conformity with us CRC. In pursuance to the Child Protection Policy and Republic Act No. 10627 also known as the Anti-bullying Act of 2013, and the Anti Sexual Harassment Act of 1995 ra. 7877 the school has established the child protection committee which covers the anti-bullying and anti-sexual harassment policies. 1. BULLYING shall be referred to: * As any severe or repeated used by one or more students of a written verbal or electronic expression or any physical act or gesture or any combination thereof directed at another student that has the effect of actually causing or facing the latter in reasonable fear of physical or emotional harm or damage to her/his property * Creating a hostile environment at school for the other student * infringing on the rise of the other student at school * or materially and substantially disrupting the education process or the orderly operation of a school such as but not limited to the following: 1. any unwanted physical contact between the bully and the victim like punching, pushing, shoving, kicking, slapping, tickling, headlocks, inflicting school pranks, teasing, fighting, and the use of available objects as weapons 2. any act that causes damage to a victim psyche and/or emotional well-being 3. any slanderous statement or accusation that causes the victim undue emotional distress like directing foul language or profanity at the target, name calling, tormenting and commenting negatively on victims looks clothes and body 4. cyberbullying or any bullying done through the use of technology or any electronic means the term shall also include any conduct resulting to harassment intimidation or humiliation through the use of other forms of technology such as texting, email, instant messaging, chatting, internet, social media, online games or other platforms or formats as defined in DepEd Order number 40, s. 2012 * Other forms of Bullying include: 1. Social Bullying. This refers To any deliberate repetitive and aggressive social behavior intended to hurt others or to belittle another individual or group 2. Gender-based bullying. This refers to any act that humiliates or exclusive a person on the basis of perceived or actual sexual orientation and gender identity (SOGI) 3. retaliation against a student for a force bullying, who provides information during an investigation of bullying or who is a witness to or has reliable information about bullying 4. all other forms of bullying analogous to those provided under the anti-bullying law and its IRR 5. name calling with the express purpose of humiliating embarrassing a student or otherwise causing trouble 6. rudeness and intimidation. these may be done through unwanted physical acts but may also be carried out through nonverbal means. a mean low or stair is an example of a nonverbal bullying 7. threats and extortion. creating fear and extorting money for their possessions from other students. threatening texts or messages in chat rooms and social 8. malicious gossip and exclusion from the group. circulating gossip or damaging stories that tends to discriminate exclude and hate other student B. Sexual Harassment shall be referred to but not limited to the following (adapted from HAU, Section 1 of Anti-Sexual Harassment Policy): * Unwelcome sexual advances * repeated sexually oriented kidding teasing joking or flirting * verbal abuse of a sexual nature * graphic commentary about an individual's body sexual prowess or sexual deficiencies * leering touching pinching or brushing against another body * displaying objects which are sexual in nature that would create a hostile or offensive environment * serious physical abuses such as sexual assault and rape * persistent and unwanted attempts to change an educational or professional relationship to a personal or intimate one ST. MARY’S COLLEGE OF BALIUAG INC. (SMCB)Recognizes that bullying and sexual harassment has many forms and can be done in and out of school premises. Accordingly, SMCB prohibits: 1. Bullying and sexual harassment on school grounds; property immediately adjacent to school grounds; at school sponsored or school related activities; functions or programs whether on or off school grounds; at school bus stops; on school buses or other vehicles owned, leased or used by a school; or through the use of technology or an electronic device owned leased or used by a school; 2. Bullying and sexual harassment at a location activity function or program that is not school related and through the use of technology or an electronic device that is not owned leased or used by a school if the act or acts in question create a hostile environment a school for the victim in french on the right of the victim at school or materially and substational distract the education process where the orderly operation of a school 3. retaliation against a person who reports bullying or sexual harassment and who provides information during an investigation of bullying or sexual harassment or who is a witness to or has reliable information about these acts OBJECTIVES OF THE POLICY 1. Educate students on the dynamics of bullying and sexual harassment the anti-bullying and anti sexual harassment policies of the school as well as the mechanism of the school for reporting of acts of bullying or retaliation 2. educate parents and guardians about the dynamics of bullying and sexual harassment the anti-bullying and antisexual harassment policies of the school and how parents and guardians can provide support and reinforce such policies at home 3. develop and implement is called based monitoring and referral system for the protection and safety of children from bullying sexual harassment and other forms of abuse FOCUS of the POLICIES 1. Increase of children's awareness on the effects of bullying and sexual harassment 2. improves student discipline 3. enhance teachers classroom engagement 4. boost parents involvement in school activities considering these focus professional development and training for all stakeholders in the components of a caring community should follow including the following; 1. student leadership and service learning trainings 2. faculty and staff facilitators training for home room programs 3. family and life enrichment programs that could cascade the ignacian core values through every aspect of school culture and curriculum 4. anti-bullying with that should promote advocacies against bullying THE CHILD PROTECTION COMMITTEE The child protection committee’s general function is to promote a zero tolerance policy to any act of child abuse exploitation violence discrimination bullying sexual harassment and other forms of abuse. the committee is composed of the following; 1.President 2. Principal 3. guidance counselor or coordinator 4. classroom advisor 5. student activity coordinator 6. Academic coordinator 7. Subject coordinator 8. students representative 9. parent representative 10. representative from DSWD The function of the committee is to: 1. Draft a school child protection policy of conduct and a plan to ensure child protection and safety we shall be reviewed every 3 years 2. Initiate information dissemination programs and organize activities for the protection of children among abuse exploitation violence discrimination bullying sexual harassment and other forms of abuse 3. develop and implement is called based referral and monitoring system 4. establish a system for identifying students who may be suffering from significant harm based on any physical emotional or behavioral signs 5. identify refer and if needed report to the appropriate offices cases involving child abuse exploitation violence discrimination bullying and sexual harassment 6. give assistance to parents or guardians whenever necessary in securing expert guidance counseling from the appropriate offices or institutions 7. coordinate closely with the women and child protection desks of the philippine national police (PNP), the local social welfare and development office (LSWDO), other government agencies and non-governmental organizations as may be appropriate 8. monitored the implementation of positive measures and effective procedures in providing necessary support for the child and for those who care for the child 9. ensure that the children's rights to be heard a respected and of held in all matters and procedures affecting their welfare Procedures in Handling Bullying Cases Any member of the school administration student parent or volunteer shall immediately report any instance of bullying or act of retaliation witnessed or that has come to one's attention to the school president through the principal to handle such issues upon receipt of such a report the principal shall promptly investigate if it has been determined that bullying sexual harassment or retaliation has occurred, the principle shall; 1. notify the law enforcement agency if she/he or designee beliefs that criminal charges under the revised penal code may be pursued against the perpetrator 2. take appropriate disciplinary administrative action by elevating the matter to the school head 3. notified the parents or guardians of the perpetrator 4. notify the parents or guardians of the victim regarding the action taken to prevent any for the acts of bullying or retaliation 5. adopt reasonable means to protect the victim from the offender including physical separation during regular class hours in all cases where a penalty is imposed on the bully or offending student the following minimum requirements of the process shall be complied with; 1. the student and the parents or guardians shall be in form of the complaint in writing by the school head 2. the student shall be given to opportunity to answer the complaint in writing with the assistance of the parents or guardians 3. if the student denies the charges and ad hoc fact finding committee shall be formed by the school head to conduct a hearing on the charges and submit a report and recommendation to the school head 4. the decision of the school head shall be in writing stating the facts and the reason for the decision 5. the decision of the school head may be appealed to the department of education (DepEd) division office.in cases where the penalty imposed is a written reprimand or community service the school head may impose these penalties based on the documents submitted before her office and without having to create an ad hoc fact finding committee in the event the bullying or sexual harassment incident or retaliation Resulted in serious physical injuries or death the case shall be deals with in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act 9344 or the “Juvenile Justice and Welfare Act”, as amended and its implementing rules and regulations in connection with other applicable laws as may be warranted by the circumstances attempted to the bullying incident. The school head considering the nature gravity are severity previous incidence of bullying or retaliation and attendant circumstances may impose reasonable disciplinary measures on the bully or offending student that is proportionate to the act committed written reprimand community service suspension exclusion or explosion may be imposed if the circumstances warrant the emotion of such penalty provided that the requirements of due process are complied with. in addition to the disciplinary sanction the bully shall also be required to undergo an intervention program which shall be administered or supervised by the school child protection committee. the parents of the bully shall be encouraged to join the intervention program. if a student after an investigation is found to have knowingly made a false accusation of bullying, the shall be subjected to disciplinary actions or to appropriate interventions in accordance with the existing rules and regulations of the department of education or school. any information relating to their identity and personal circumstances of the bully victim or bystander shall be treated with atmost confidentiality. the names of the bully victim are bystander there may only be available to the school head or administrator teacher or guidance counselorDesignated by the school head and parents or guardians of students who are or have been victims of bullying sexual harassment or retaliation and school personal who commit a breach of confidentiality shall be subjected to appropriate administrative disciplinary action in accordance with the existing rules and regulations of the department of education or the school without prejudice to any civil or criminal action. Procedure that ST. MARY’S COLLEGE OF BALIUAG has set out to deal with occurrences of bullying and sexual harassment. These steps are designed to deal with the incidence of bullying on various levels. We aim to initially dea with these occurrences at a pastoral level by encouraging honest dialouge and positive outcomes for all involved. We recognize that these procedures may not always be successful and we have outlined further disciplinary action that will be taken if there is a recurrence of bullying. Step 1: Incident Register The staff member witnessing the incident should write a short report as soon as possible, stating; * Date/Time/Place * Names involved * Any witnesses * Nature of the incident The request will then be passed on to the class adviser as a matter of urgency Step 2: Reports Each person involved in the incident and witnesses will complete the set pro-forma which seeks the following information; * The names of those involved in the incident * Particulars relating to the date, time and place of the incident * A description of the events which took place * THe names of witnesses to the incident * A list of the consequences resulting from the incident At this point, it is recommended that all concerned meet to work on a mutually acceptable resolution to the problem. This is to be done in conjunction with their class advisers. Step 3: FOLLOW UP Any of the following may need to be implemented. 1. Those affected by bullying or sexual harassment: * May need to express their feelings * May need to be helped with strategies/skills to handle the problem and avoid future recurrences * May require professional counseling 2. The bully or the harasser * Will discuss bullying and sexual harassment in general (feelings of victim, the bully and the haasser) * It is expected to acknowledge and express regret for the personal hurt resulting from their action * Will be expected to pay for any damage to property caused by their behavior * May be asked to take responsibility to assist in preventing further bullyingor sexually harassing anyone * May require profesional counseling 3. They may need to be followed up with a wider community e.g., class, grade level, whole school. Selected students and teachers should pay close attention to the situation. Review with tbe victim and bully if further incidences have occured. As part of the resolution of the case, the children will undergo psycho spiritual session which will be facilitated by the guidance office and in coordination with the campus ministry office A series of follow up and monitoring will be made by the guidance office in close coordination with the parent/ guardian of the children to see improvement and development. a report will be made for the class adviser and the discipline committee for possible follow up. Step 4: Recurrence of Bullying or Sexual Harassment. once it has been established that the bully or the harasser has reoffended, the written warning is presented and explained to the bully or harasser who read and completed it in the presence of the appropriate member of the staff Step 5: Breach of Documented Warning. at the first breach of the warning, there will be an interview with parents and the student. the consequence for discontinued bullying or harassing is at the discretion of the class adviser in coordination with the discipline committee. Step 6. Recording. all written materials will be filed in office of the prefect of discipline in case there are further incidents. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISION: Reporting Requirements. submit to the division office within the first week of each school year a report on relevant information and statistics on bullying and retaliation from the preceding school year(IRR OF REP. ACT, No. 10627 Rule VII Reporting) REINTEGRATION PROGRAM ST. MARY’s COLLEGE OF BALIUAG believes that bullies need understanding, love and support, thus a program to lead them back to the circle of friends they have is of great importance. to help them grow up ing to interrelate with others without manipulation, harassment and abuse, they will undergo the following; 1. counseling sessions 2. conference with parents 3. change in section 4. monitoring their behavioral performance 5. celebrating their coming back to the mainstream CAMPUS SECURITY POLICY 1. Only bonafide students of the school shall be allowed inside the campus. no visitors shall be allowed inside the campus during their school hours except for valid reasons. they Shall be required to sign the log book of the security service. even parents of the students should not freely enter the school campus anytime without prior authorization from the administration. 2. teacher shall confer with the parents/ guardians or entertain visitors during their off period. No Students to visitors shall be allowed inside the school building and the premises after the last class period has ended except for the school with the night classes. ARTICLE VIII STUDENT SERVICES A wide variety of co-curricular and extra-curricular activities are offered by the school to supplement and enrich classroom activities. In the process, these activities are also opportunities to discover hidden potentials, develop and promote the students' intellectual, cultural, social and spiritual abilities so that they become creative, responsive and productive members of the school, family and society. Section 1 SPIRITUAL SERVICE (CAMPUS MINISTRY) As an institution rooted in the Catholic tradition, St. Mary's College of Baliuag offers students a rich, faith-based environment and community. Students, teachers and staff are encouraged to foster their spiritual development and put their beliefs into action through service to others. Everyone is welcome to participate in Eucharistic liturgies, sacramental prayer services, discussions and prayer groups, retreats and recollections. Mission Statement. The Office of Campus Ministry reflects the vision and mission of St. Mary's College of Baliuag. It was founded to assist and help the members of the SMCB community in their faith-journey to become mature Christians. Witnessing the Gospel values of Jesus, the Office of the Campus Ministry strives to nurture the spiritual well-being of the school community. It offers programs that are faithful to our Catholic heritage as they are rooted in Ignacian spirituality. •Masses are celebrated regularly and are sponsored by students and teachers. •The Sacrament of Reconciliation is offered to students and personnel of the school. •Recollections are facilitated for students from Grades 4-5 and Grades 7-9. •Overnight recollection for Grade 6 and retreat for Grades 10 and 12. •Sacrament of Confirmation and First Communion are offered to Grade 3 pupils. •The Ignacian Formation Program (IFP) is given to the faculty, personnel, and students. This program animates and inspires stakeholders to follow the spirituality of the Foundress of the RVM Congregation, the Venerable Ignacia del Espiritu Santo. •Spiritual direction and counseling are extended to the members of the school community. Section 2 EXTERNAL RELATIONS The office of the External Relations is one of the Support Services Units that spearheads the designing and implementing of the social orientation, involvement and community extension programs to the school community. It is the service arm of the school that responds to the call of various social problems of the less privileged members of the society especially the immediate barangays surrounding the school through the outreach programs as well as the emerging social and ecological issues. Programs and Services 1. Educational Assistance •Tuloy Aral ni Madre Ignacia Scholarship (TAMIS) Program •Advocacy to Social Issues through seminars/forum 2. Other Outreach Activities •Class Reach-out ✔️Kuya and Ate Ko ✔️My Dear Friend ✔️Gandang Steward ✔️Bukas Palad ✔️Young Catechists for Christ ✔️Adopt a Scholar ✔️Garage Sale ✔️Adopt a Public School •Club Reach-out •Fund Drive •Relief Collection Section 3 INSTRUCTIONAL MEDIA CENTER (IMC) The IMC provides not only the technical and specialized study materials (print and non-print) needed to meet the educational demands of both faculty and students but also motivates, stimulates and improves their reading and viewing 3.1 Library The GS / HS Library also offers access to the Internet, the use of computers and CD-ROM's in its role in providing information, resources and services other than printed materials available. Professionally trained librarians and other library personnel maintain efficient service to help students with their needs. Office Hours: Mondays-Fridays 7:00 AM-5:30 PM (no noon break) Saturdays 7:30 AM-11:30 AM Policies: 1. Students should register their library visit through the Library Attendance Recording System (LARS). 2. Students must secure her/his Students Borrower's Card from the Librarian/Staff before borrowing library materials. 3. Students should leave the library five-minutes before the end of recess and lunch period to be able to return to their classrooms on time. 4. Library Loan: Schedule, Duration and Fines. A maximum of three-books at a time can be borrowed regardless of their kind, Each type has its corresponding loan duration as well as a penalty for overdue materials. Non-school days are not subjected to fines. 1. Lost/Damage borrowed book/s. In case of lost or damage material/s the following steps are applied: This physical a health rec promote a. The incident must be reported immediately. b. Lost/Damage material/s must be replaced with the same title or nearest title but with the latest copyright date or pay the amount at the current market price. Office Ho c. A period of one month will be allotted for the book/s to be replaced. d. Reported incidents will not be charged with a fine within the grace period. e. Demonstrate proper behavior at all times. f. Report any unpleasant incident or improper behavior committed by other students. 3.2 Audio Visual Center. The Audio-Visual Center is one of the major units of the IMC. It provides a variety of Audio-Visual materials, equipment and facilities for instructional purposes. All AV resources are strictly for SMCB Campus use only. Policies: 1. Reservation of instructional resources should be made at least three days before its use and shall be requested from the AV Staff with the proper signature of the persons concerned. 2. AV equipment should be returned on the same day. 3. Lost or damaged AV materials and equipment while on loan, will require a replacement of the same brand/title or similar to its kind and function. 4. Students are expected to abide by the rules and regulations governing the use of Audio-Visual Resources such as materials, equipment and facilities. Section 4 HEALTH SERVICES (CLINIC) This unit provides special health services such as annual physical and dental examinations, maintenance of growth charts, health records, immunizations, and first aid for emergency cases to promote good health and ensure the well-being of students. Office Hours: Monday to Friday 6:45 AM - 5:00 PM (no lunch break) Saturday 7:30 AM-11:30 AM Policies: 1. Physicians and dentists are available 16 hours a week from Monday to Thursday. 2. Two registered nurses are available daily. 3. Physical and dental examinations are administered to students at least once a year. The class adviser is informed prior to the scheduled physical examination. 4. The clinic takes care of all minor physical indispositions of the students. 5. Students suffering from serious illness shall immediately be sent home upon the advice from the school clinic. 6. When students go to the clinic, they should bring their Clinic Pass and the Class Beadles/responsible student should write on the beadle/log sheet opposite their name the time they leave and the time they return to the classroom. 7. Students without the Clinic Pass will not be entertained by the health services staff except in emergency cases. 8. The clinic is strictly for students / personnel who are not feeling well. It should not be used for any other purposes such as a resting place or public comfort room. 9. Students who suffered from communicable diseases should secure a clearance from the clinic before entering the classroom. Section 5 GUIDANCE SERVICES to ensure The students are the main reason why our school exists: therefore, it is important that the utmost attention is given to them that they will grow holistically under our care. Guidance is the help given to our students to assist them in managing their family, peers, community and environment in general. To attain life and to build sound relationships within herself/himself, her/his this, different guidance services are available for them to help them realize their full potential as persons. Services rendered by the Guidance Center 1. To help the students attain a holistic growth: •Homeroom Guidance is conducted to students in class focusing on three (3) developmental topics: personal, social, academic, and career aspects of their growth. •Counseling is for all students and parents as well. During scheduled counseling sessions, students are called in. Students are welcome to visit their counselor after class hours. 2. To prepare the students in formulating realistic career goals: •Career Orientations are conducted to students from Grades 1 to Grade 12. For Grades 1 to 3, career topics are integrated in their Homeroom Guidance Program while for Grades 4 to 12, an •assembly is held for this purpose. Grade 10's career orientation (two (2) series) focuses on the student's preparation for Senior High School. 3. To assist in the continuous improvement of the school's instructional program as well as the guidance program: •Testing of students' school ability, personality, interest, aptitude, subject achievement. Results of the tests administered during the previous school year will be disseminated to parents during the 1st quarter of the current year. •Research conducted is based on the guidance test results, evaluation results, and feedback of graduates. 4. Other activities the Guidance Center undertakes are: •Individual Inventory (Student Portfolio) •Orientation for both the students and the parents of transferees •Sectioning (grouping) of students for better performance in academics and other school activities 5. Release of requested recommendation form is after three (3) working days from the date of filing. Office Hours: Monday to Friday: 7:00 am to 5:00 pm (no lunch break) Saturday (by appointment): 7:30 am to 11:30 am Section 6 FOOD SERVICES (CANTEEN) in class personal, th During alled in en class The school canteen helps provide the students opportunities for developing desirable food eating habits and social behavior. Since good nutrition is essential to students' growth, development and achievement, the canteen serves hot lunch and snacks. Policies: goals: 1. Students should wait for their turn to be served. They should form a line when buying and show courtesy and politeness to the canteen personnel. 2. CLAYGO: "Clean As You Go." Cleanliness and orderliness should be observed in the canteen. Bottles and soiled dishes should be returned to their proper places after use. Tables should be left clean as a sign of respect for the next users. Waste materials should be disposed of and segregated properly. Using or bringing of single-use plastic is highly discouraged. "Lunch box Fridays" is also observed weekly and bringing one's own cutleries and tumbler everyday is encouraged to promote eating hygiene and reduction of waste. 3. Proper decorum should be observed. Shouting and running inside the canteen is strictly prohibited. Section 7 REGISTRAR The Registrar's Office facilitates admission and enrolment of the students, takes charge of the students' files and records, prepares certification, issues transcript of records and other documents upon request. Policy: Release of requested records or documents is after three (3) working days from the date of request. Office Hours: Monday to Friday: 7:00 am to 5:00 pm (no lunch break) Saturday : 7:30 am to 11:30 am Section 8 CASHIER'S OFFICE The Staff in the Cashier's office receives payments for school accounts, issues official receipts, and disburses the materials requested for school needs. The staff is in charge of preparing and sending to all students their Statement of Accounts (SOA) and they are in charge of issuing the Students' Examination Permits to advisers for the quarterly examinations. Office Hours: Monday to Friday: 7:00 am to 5:00 pm (no lunch break) Saturday : 7:30 am to 11:30 am Section 9 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY CENTER The Information Technology Center (ITC) is a partner in the progress of the school's goal to achieve quality Ignacian Marian Education that makes St. Mary's College of Baliuag globally competitive. Services: •Conducts orientation to all personnel and students •Conducts regular preventive maintenance in the offices and computer laboratory work stations •Responds to emergency requests for repairs of units •Upgrades IT equipment and Local Area Network/Wireless Area Network •Repairs computer units and IT peripherals Computer Laboratory Rules and Regulations 1. Computer Laboratories are available based on the schedule prepared by Computer teachers and TLE Area Coordinator. 2. To keep the computer laboratory conducive for learning, the following must be observed: a. Bringing FOOD and DRINKS are not allowed. b. Storing and playing computer GAMES (offline/online) is prohibited. C. When all stations are occupied, ITC Staff has the right to ask students doing non-class related work to give up their station to accommodate students with class/assignments/projects. d. Students must not disturb or distract other users. e. Report immediately to the Teacher in-Charge or ITC staff any misbehavior observed in the computer laboratory. f. Before leaving the computer laboratory, students must ensure that their station has been cleaned; chairs returned properly; and the computer equipment must be properly shut down. 3. To avoid loss of files or documents, the students are advised to save their files using their emails or dropbox. 4. Access to the Internet is for educational purposes only. Students are prohibited in posting/using obscene language offensive messages, pictures and comments in any social networking site or its equivalent. Appendix A Office Hours: Monday to Friday: 7:30 am to 5:00 pm (no lunch break) Saturday: 7:30 am to 11:30 am Section 10 FACILITIES St. Mary's College of Baliuag has the following amenities: a. School Chapel ( G / F , Assumption Building) b. Museum ( G / F , Assumption Building) c. Auditorium ( 5 / F Immaculate Heart of Mary Building) d. Mother Ignacia Hall ( 2 / F , Sacred Heart Building) e. Multi-Purpose Hall (G/F, Sacred Heart Building) f. Canteen (G/F, Immaculate Heart of Mary Building) g. Centralized Library ( 2 / F , Assumption Building) h. Audio-Visual Room 2 / F IMC) i. Music Room ( 3 / F , Sacred Heart Building) j. Sewing Room ( 2 / F St. Joseph Building) k. Home Economics Laboratories (GS, JHS. SHS and College Mini-Hotel) 1. Speech Laboratory (2/F, St. Joseph Building) m. Broadcasting Laboratory ( 2 / F , St. Joseph Building) n. Science Laboratories: Biology and Chemistry, Physics and General Science, Nursing Laboratory (GS, JHS, SHS, College) o. Dance Studio ( 2 / F Immaculate Heart of Mary Building) p. Computer Laboratories (GS, JHS, SHS, College) q. Eco Park (back of Holy Family Building) r. Play Grounds (Kindergarten and School Grounds) s. Waiting Area (Aquino Gate) APPENDICES Appendix A MORNING CEREMONY PRAYERS 1. Morning Offering O Jesus, through the Immaculate Heart of Mary, I offer you my prayers, works, joys and sufferings of this day, in union with the Holy sacrifice of the mass throughout the world. I offer them for all the intentions of Your Sacred Heart, the salvation of souls, reparation for sins, the reunion of all Christians. I offer them for all the intentions of our Bishops and all the apostles of prayer, and in particular... 2. Prayer to Our Mother of Perpetual Help (Every Wednesday) O Mother of Perpetual Help, grant that I may ever invoke your most powerful name, which is the safeguard of the living and salvation of the dying. O purest Mary, O sweetest Mary, let your name henceforth be ever on my lips. Delay not, O Blessed Lady, to help me whenever I call on you, ever repeating your sacred name, "Mary, Mary" O what consolation, what sweetness, what confidence, what emotion fill my soul when I pronounce your sacred name, or even when I think of you! l thank God for having given you, for my good so sweet, so powerful, so lovely a name but I will not be content with merely pronouncing your name. Let my love for your prompt me to hail you, Mother of Perpetual Help. O Mother of Perpetual Help, pray for us. 3. Prayer For Our Nation O Almighty God, bless and protect the Philippines. May it ever be a country of freedom and justice. Teach us to love You and to love our country. Inspire and guide our rulers. May we always be united and loyal to You, and may we always be loyal to our country and to our flag. Grant us true peace. Amen. 4. Prayer for the Beatification of Mother Ignacia del Espiritu Santo. Father in heaven, your name is glorified over all the earth in your saints, men and women, distinguished by a whole-hearted service and love for you. Through them, you have established religious congregations in your Church. In Your goodness and mercy, You have looked with favor on Your people in the Philippines and have chosen from among them. Your lowly handmaid IGNACIA DEL ESPIRITU SANTO to be the foundress of a religious family under the special protection of the Blessed Virgin Mary. We humbly ask You, then, to glorify Your name in her by performing the miracles needed for her beatification through Your Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. (silently mention your petition) May her prayers and intercession obtain for us the favors we ask for, particularly that of remaining ever faithful to Your love and service. Amen. 5. The Holy Rosary (during designated days) Appendix B Common Prayers Used in the Classroom 1. Lord's Prayer Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy Name; Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead Us not into temptation but deliver us from evil. Amen. 2. Hail Mary Hail Mary full of grace, the Lord is with you, Blessed are you among women and blessed is the fruit of Thy womb Jesus. Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners, now and at the hour of our death. Amen. 3. Glory Be Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, as it was in the beginning, is now and will be forever. Amen. Leader: Most Sacred Heart of Jesus All: Have Mercy on us. Leader: Immaculate Heart of Mary All: Pray for Us. Leader: Faithful Heart of Joseph All: Pray for Us. Leader: Venerable Ignacia del Espíritu Santo All: Pray for Us. 4. Memorare Remember, O most gracious Virgin Mary, that never was it known that anyone who fled to Your protection, implored Your help and sought your intercession, was left unaided. Inspired with this confidence, I fly unto You, o Virgin of Virgins, my Mother. To You, I come, before You I stand, sinful and sorrowful. O Mother of the Word incarnate, despise not my petition, but in Your clemency hear and answer us. Amen. 5. Consecration of St. Mary’s College of Baliwag to Our Lady of Guadalupe Our dearest Mother, Our Lady of Guadalupe, woman clothed with the sun, Patroness of the Philippines We, the whole community of St. Mary’s College of Baliwag consecrate ourselves to you. To St. Juan Diego at the Hill of Tepeyac you revealed yourself as our merciful Mother, the merciful Mother of all humankind, of all those who love you, of those who seek you, of those who have confidence in you. We cry unto you and place our whole confidence in you. We ask you to pray for us all: That our RVM sisters be your loving presence in our midst; that our administrators be true parents for us like the Father; that teachers be Jesus’ caring shepherds to our students; that our personnel and staff be true witnesses to Christian service; That our parents be our first teachers at home; That our students learn to become outstanding Christian leaders, and; That our alumni be the true salt of the earth and light of the world. Loving Mother, for the past 100 years, you lavished us with your maternal care. You guided us all to pursue our vision and goal, and you showed us to truly carry out our mission. Through this humble consecration, we ask you to continually guide us as we do our best to become true Marian and Christian believers. May your guidance and love for us truly lead us to Jesus. Amen. 6. Devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus (To be prayed every Friday, except first Friday) Leader: O most amiable and adorable heart of Jesus, Heart full of mercy and goodness, behold me humbly prostrate before You, to invoke Your mercy, to implore Your protection, and to offer myself wholly to You. Response: I dedicate to You each day and forever my life, my thoughts and words, my actions and sufferings. I promise ever to be Your faithful servant and to promote Your glory according to my power. Accept O Divine Heart, this my sacrifice; Inflame it with Your divine love that it may be well pleasing to You, and united with Your merits bring down upon us all the fullness of Your blessings, the heavenly dew of Your grace, and those abundant treasures which You have promised to those who honor You. Surround us with Your shelter and protection. Let us find in you our refuge, our consolation, and our hope in these oppressed times. Be our reconciliation with God, our support in life, our confidence in death, our everlasting joy in heaven. Amen. Leader: Heart of Jesus, I implore that I may ever love You more and more. Response: Heart of Jesus, I put my trust in You. Leader: Sacred Heart of Jesus, I believe in Your love for me. Response: Sacred heart of Jesus Your Kingdom come. Leader: Sweet Heart of Jesus, be my love. Response: Heart of Jesus, burning with love for us, set our hearts on fire with love of You. Closing Prayer O Almighty and eternal God, look upon the Heart of Your dearly beloved Son, and upon the praise and satisfaction He offers You in the name of sinners and for those who seek Your mercy; be appeased, and grant us pardon in the name of the same Jesus Christ, Your Son, who lives and reigns with You, in the unity of the Holy Spirit, world without end. Amen. Leader: O Most Sacred Heart of Jesus, Response: Have mercy on us. 7. An Act of Consecration to the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus (To be prayed on First Friday if there is no First Friday Mass) Leader/All: To You, most sacred Heart of Jesus, I devote my life. To You I consecrate all my thoughts, words, actions, and sufferings. My whole being shall be employed henceforth in loving, serving, and glorifying You. Be Thou, most blessed and adorable Heart, the sole object of my love, the protector of my life, the pledge of my salvation, and my secure refuge at the hour of my death. Be Thou my advocate at the throne of Divine Justice, and screen me from the wrath which my sins deserve. I trust entirely in your mercy. I place all my confidence in You. Destroy in me all that is displeasing to You. Jesus, meek and humble of heart, make my heart like unto Thine. Imprint Thyself like a seal upon my heart in order that I may never be separated from You. May I be a victim forever consecrated to your glory - ever burning with the flames of your pure love in time and for eternity. This is my whole desire - to live in You: This shall be my happiness, to live and die as your devoted servant. Sweet Heart of Jesus, I implore that I may love You more and more. Amen. Leader: Heart of Jesus, burning with love for us. Response: Inflame our hearts with love of You. Leader: Let us pray Lord, we beseech You, let your Holy Spirit kindle in our hearts that fire of charity which Our Lord Jesus Christ, your Son, sent forth from His Innermost Heart upon this earth, and willed that it should burn with vehemence. Who lives and reigns with You, in the unity of the same Holy Spirit, God, forever and ever. Amen. O Most Sacred Heart of Jesus, Have mercy on us. 8. Grace Before Meals Bless us, O Lord, and these Your gifts which we are about to receive from Your bounty, through Christ our Lord. Amen. 9. Grace After Meals We give You thanks, O Lord for all your gifts which we have received from Your bounty through Christ Our Lord. Amen. 10. Prayer to the Guardian Angel Angel of God, my guardian dear, to whom God’s love entrusts me here. Ever this day be at my side, to light and guard, to rule and guide. Amen From sinful stain do keep me free, at the hour of my death my guardian be. O great saints whose name I bear, protect me and pray for me that like you I may serve God faithfully here on earth and glorify him eternally in heaven. Amen 11. Angelus (prayed at 12:00 o’clock and 6:00 o’clock) The angel of the Lord declared unto Mary And she conceived by the Holy Spirit Hail Mary…… Behold the handmaid of the Lord. Be it done unto me according to your word. Hail Mary…… And the Word was made flesh And dwelt among us. Hail Mary…… Pray for us, O Holy Mother of God That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ. Let us pray: Pour forth, we beseech You, O Lord. Your grace into our hearts, that we to whom the incarnation of Christ Your Son, was made known by the message of an angel. May by His passion and cross, be brought to the glory of His resurrection. Through the same Christ our Lord. Amen 12. Three O’clock Prayer You died Jesus, but the source of life flowed out for souls, and the ocean of mercy, opened up for the whole world. O Fountain of Life immeasurable Divine Mercy, cover the whole world and empty Yourself out upon us. O Blood and Water which flowed out from the heart of Jesus as a Fountain of Mercy for us, I trust in You! // Holy God, Holy Mighty One, Holy Immortal One, have mercy on us and the whole world. // Amen Jesus, King of Mercy, we trust in You Jesus, King of Mercy, let the whole world trust in You 13. Act of Contrition O my God, I am heartily sorry for having offended You, and I detest all my sins, because I dread the loss of heaven and the pains of hell. But most of all because I have offended You, my God, who are so good and deserving of all my love. I firmly resolve with the help of Your grace to do penance and to amend my life. Amen. 14. Apostle’s Creed I believe in God, the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth, and in Jesus Christ, his Only Son, our Lord (at the words that follow, up to and including the Virgin Mary, all bow) who was conceived by the Holy Spirit born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, died and was buried; He descended into hell; on the third day He rose again from the dead; He ascended into heaven, and is seated at the right hand of God the Father Almighty; from there he will come to judge the living and the dead. I believe in the Holy Spirit, the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and life everlasting. Amen. Appendix C. Ignacian Core and Related Values CORE VALUES RELATED VALUES BEHAVIORAL INDICATORS 1. Faith 1.1 Strong Faith in God • Manifests a strong sense and experience of God’s loving presence developed through personal prayer and reflection. • Participates actively in the religious celebrations of the community • Upholds what is righteous and just in accordance with Sacred Scriptures and Church’s teachings. • Displays joyful confidence in God’s loving care • Is persistent and passionate in pursuing a mission even in the face of adversity. 1.2 Prophetic Witness to Gospel Values Takes a courageous stand and supports the position of the Catholic Church on current issues of morality and social justice. • Works with enthusiasm and constancy for common welfare and social transformation • Proclaims joyfully the good that God does for and through people • Takes risk in fighting the evils of apathy, complacency and cynicism • Offers active support for the victims and survivors of violence, exploitation and oppression 1.3 Nationalism • Appreciates the rich cultural diversities of Filipinos and promotes the best of Filipino customs and traditions • Upholds the rights, privileges, duties and responsibilities of Filipino citizenship • Practices critical analysis and reflection to see the interrelationships of significant historical events • Works for the conservation of natural resources • Promotes international understanding and world peace. 1.4 Justice • Shows reverence for life and human dignity • Promotes concern and protection for women, children and cultural minorities • Stands up for what is just and right in human and organizational relationships • Strongly supports dialogue and due process in decision making. • Upholds the rights and privileges of every human person regardless of creed, race, gender or social status 1.5 Communion • Contributes to the well-being of the family and helps create and maintain a family climate in school • Manifests love and concern for the integrity of creation • Shows understanding of the weaknesses and limitations of self and others • Shows patient endurance in working for reconciliation, justice and peace, and inter-faith understanding • Accepts/offers counsel and correction in the spirit of familial love 2. Excellence 2.1 Integrity • Expresses one’s self authentically, tactfully and unpretentiously • Takes decisive action against all forms of dishonesty and unethical conduct • Upholds Christian values without regard for personal gain • Fulfills one’s obligations and promises faithfully • Gives honest praise and appreciation for the good done by others. 2.2 Competence • Shows love for assiduous learning and research • Updates knowledge and skills in a process of life-long learning • Pursues high achievement standards in everything one does • Expands one’s interests and expertise • Shows appreciation for faith in Jesus Christ as source and wellspring of human knowledge and values 2.3 Resourcefulness • Seeks continual improvement in performing tasks and responsibilities • Sees obstacles and difficulties as opportunities for growth and greater service • Makes good use of available sources through creativity and innovation • Utilizes resources judiciously to avoid wasteful consumption • Anticipates and deals with change effectively 2.4 Discipline • Works responsibly without need for close supervision • Shows consistency in performing tasks systematically and competently • Adheres to high standards of professionalism and work ethics • Is punctual and prompt in meeting responsibilities and appointments • Shows refinement, propriety and orderliness in dealing with superiors, peers and others 2.5 Self-Reliance • Takes full responsibility for the development of one’s potential • Practices industry and diligence to avoid undue dependence on others • Seeks empowerment of self and others towards the common good • Accepts and appreciates the help and support extended by others • Uses confidently one’s giftedness and training in pursuing goals 3. Service 3.1 Stewardship • Disposes responsibly one’s time, talents and treasure for love of others • Makes one’s self available for service where and when needed • Works beyond what is expected generously, freely and voluntarily • Respects and nurtures the giftedness in others to promote the growth of persons and communities • Reaches out to others tirelessly so that all may enjoy fullness of life in Jesus Christ 3.2 Humility • Accepts one’s giftedness and limitations with graciousness and sincerity • Manifests an unaffected and frugal lifestyle • Confesses utter dependence on God in all things • Shows cheerfulness and joy in all circumstances • Stays kind and unresentful when faced with rejection or unfavorable judgment 3.3 Charity • Exudes zeal for the good of souls • Serves the needy with the maternal quality of mildness and feminine tenderness as exemplified by our Mother Mary • Practices prayerful discernment personally and with others in making decisions • Exercises thoughtful care in responding to the needs and feelings of others • Manages one’s time and resources properly in order to serve the needy and the common good 3.4 Courage • Derives inspiration from significant events in the life of Mother Ignacia del Espíritu Santo • Responds to God’s call to service positively and resolutely despite risks and uncertainties • Performs difficult tasks with joyful expectation of God’s loving providence and inspires others to do likewise • Stands up for what is right and just based on one’s Christian faith in combating the influence of destructive subcultures • Shows initiative, perseverance and determination in meeting responsibilities 3.5 Preferential Love for the Poor • Shows respect and gives support for those dehumanized by poverty, ignorance and helplessness • Demonstrates sensitivity and responsiveness to human misery • Acknowledges and champions the struggles of the poor, depressed, oppressed and exploited for more humane existence • Helps the poor become self-reliant and empowered • Works with other people and agencies to provide educational, health care and livelihood opportunities for the poor Appendix D Flag Ceremony Songs and Pledge 1. Lupang Hinirang Bayang magiliw, Perlas ng Silanganan Alab ng puso, sa dibdib mo’y buhay Lupang hinirang, duyan ka ng magiting Sa manlulupig, di ka pasisili. Sa dagat at bundok, sa simoy at sa langit mong bughaw May dilag ang tula at awit sa paglayang minamahal Ang kislap ng watawat mo’y tagumpay na magniningning Ang bituin at araw niya kalian pa ma’y di magdidilim Lupa ng araw ng luwalhati’t pagsinta, buhay ay langit sa piling mo. Aming ligaya na pag may mang-aapi Ang mamatay nang dahil sa iyo. 2. Panatang Makabayan Iniibig ko ang Pilipinas Aking lupang sinilangan Tahanan ng aking lahi, Kinukupkop ako at tinutulungang maging malakas, masipag, at marangal. Dahil mahal ko ang Pilipinas, diringgin ko ang payo ng aking mga magulang. Susundin ko ang tuntunin ng paaralan, Tutuparin ko ang tungkulin ng mamamayang makabayan; Naglilingkod, nag-aaral at nananalangin ng buong katapatan. Iaalay ko ang aking buhay, pangarap, pagsisikap sa bansang Pilipinas. 3. School Hymn The school we love, St. Mary’s is her name She stands a statue great and strong. She holds our hands and guides us through this world By keeping us all sound and strong. She molds our souls by teaching us the faith She molds our minds and bodies, too. She’s all what a mother is. She’s our beloved SMC. Let’s hold her high and lift her to the heights. Let’s fight for her and love her all the time. Now open your hearts to her, dear SMC St. Mary’s College, she’s a true ALMA MATER DEAR. St. Mary’s College, she’s a school and a home all in one. St. Mary’s College, let her blue and her white banner fly. Let her live in all our hearts and lips Let St. Mary’s College ever live. 4. Blessing Song May the blessing of the Lord be upon you. The blessing of the Father and the Son, May the spirit of Love, the spirit of God be with you all your days. (2x) Appendix E SONGS IN HONOR OF MOTHER FOUNDRESS 1. Madre Ignacia, Uliran ng Kagitingan Isang munting birhen sa Binondo sumibol Dinilig ng biyaya, lumaki, yumabong Namunga ng Kabanalang ang hiyas ay karukhaan. Damit ay kalinisan at masunuring kalooban. Pinalakas ng pag-ibig itong babaing mahinhin, Pinatibay ng pananalig ang pusong mahiyain, Sa Santa Iglesia nagbigay ng bagong supling, Angkan ni Maria, RVM ang naging turing. Koro: //Madre Ignacia, uliran ng kagitingan Sa pakikibahan kami ay patnubayan!// Madre Ignacia hantungan ng aming paggiliw Madre Ignacia, babaing tapat hanggang libing. Landas mong tinahak ang pangarap naming sundin Daan ng paglilingkod, pagtitis at panalangin. (Koro)
